LOCATION SANDBUR                MO

Established Series
Rev. JAD-RLT
09/2004

SANDBUR SERIES

The Sandbur series consists of very deep, somewhat excessively drained soils formed in loamy alluvium on flood plains of intermediate sized streams near active channels. Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is 42 inches, and mean annual temperature is 57 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Coarse-loamy, siliceous, superactive, nonacid, mesic Mollic Udifluvents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Sandbur fine sandy loam on a 1 percent slope in unimproved pasture at an elevation of 710 feet.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

    Ap--0 to 10 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) fine sandy loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak very fine granular structure; very friable; common fine roots; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 10 inches thick)

    C1--10 to 19 inches; stratified very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) and yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) loamy fine sand; single grain; loose; few fine roots; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.

    C2--19 to 26 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) fine sandy loam; massive; very friable; few fine roots; slightly alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.

    C3--26 to 32 inches; stratified very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) loamy fine sand; single grain; loose; few fine roots; moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.

    C4--32 to 45 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) fine sandy  loam; massive; very friable; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.

    C5--45 to 52 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) and brown (10YR 5/3) fine sand; single grain; loose; 5 percent chert gravel; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.

    C6--52 to 60 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) and brown (10YR 5/3) loamy fine sand; single grain; loose; slightly alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Taney County, Missouri; about 3 3/4 miles southeast of Taneyville on Beaver Creek, 1,300 feet north and 200 feet west of the southeast corner of section 31, T. 24 N., R. 18 W; USGS Hilda quadrangle; lat. 36 degrees 43 minutes 6 seconds N. and long. 92 degrees 58 minutes 1 second W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Depth to bedrock is more than 80 inches. The particle size control section averages from 0 to 35 percent gravel. 

The A or Ap horizon has color value of 3 and chroma of 2 or 3.  It is fine sandy loam, sandy loam, or loamy sand, or their gravelly analogues. Reaction is moderately acid to moderately alkaline.

The C horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR,  value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 1 to 6.  It is stratified loam, fine sandy loam, sandy loam, coarse sandy loam, loamy fine sand, loamy sand, loamy coarse sand, sand, coarse sand or their gravelly analogs.  Reaction is moderately acid to moderately alkaline.

The 2C horizon, where present, is similar in color and texture to the C horizon, but has from 35 to 75 percent rock fragments. Reaction is strongly acid to slightly acid.

Some pedons have a 2Btb horizon.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other series in this family.  Series from similar families are the Kaintuck, Kickapoo, and Wideman.  Kaintuck soils have less sand and lack mollic colors.  Kickapoo soils have mixed mineralogy and have a mean annual soil temperature of about 47 degrees F.  Wideman soils are in the sandy particle size family.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Sandbur soils are on flood plains of intermediate sized streams near active channels.  Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent.  These soils are formed in loamy alluvium.  The mean annual precipitation ranges from 38 to 48 inches, and mean annual temperature ranges from 55 to 61 degrees Fahrenheit.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Kaintuck soils and the Cedargap, Lecoma, Huntington and Racket soils.  Kaintuck soils have less sand and lack dark colors, they are on similar positions along larger streams.  Cedargap soils have over 35 percent rock fragment in the control section and are on similar positions along smaller streams.  Lecoma soils have an argillic horizon and are on stream terraces and footslopes.  Huntington soils have less sand and are on flood plains adjacent to the Sandbur soils.  Racket soils have less sand and are moderately well to somewhat poorly drained.  They are on low stream terraces, meander scars, and depressional areas adjacent to uplands.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Sandbur soils are somewhat excessively drained.  Runoff is very low.  Permeability is moderately rapid. The hydraulic conducivity is high.  These soils are subject to very brief flooding in most years.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are used for pasture with limited use for hay crops.  Native vegetation was mixed hardwoods.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Ozark Highland region (MLRA 116A) of Missouri.  This series is moderately extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Taney County, Missouri, 1991

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this series are: 
ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 10 inches (Ap horizon) 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
