LOCATION SAUKEN                 NJ

Established Series
DCS/ATD/EIB
08/2024

SAUKEN SERIES

MLRA--149A
Depth Class--very deep
Drainage Class--moderately well drained
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity--moderately low to high
Parent Material-loamy-skeletal human-transported materials with a high content of construction debris and other human artifacts
Geomorphic Location--filled marshlands and drainageways
Slope--0 to 5 percent
Mean Annual Air Temperature--13 degrees C (56 degrees F)
Mean Annual Precipitation--1160 mm (46 inches)

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, artifactic, mixed, superactive, nonacid, mesic Anthroportic Udorthents

TYPICAL PEDON: Sauken gravelly-artifactual sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes in a grassed area of a park with a 2 percent slope. (Colors are for moist soils, unless otherwise noted.)

 ^Au--0 to 21 centimeters; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2), gravelly-artifactual sandy loam; massive; friable; many fine roots throughout and many very fine roots throughout; 2 percent gravel sized quartzite fragments; 5 percent gravel size concrete, 5 percent coal combustion products, 5 percent gravel sized brick artifacts; slightly alkaline (pH 7.8); clear wavy boundary. (0 to 25 centimeters thick)

 ^Cu1--21 to 50 centimeters; strong brown (7.5YR 4/6) gravelly-artifactual sandy loam; massive; friable; few fine roots throughout; 2 percent glauconite pellets; 5 percent gravel sized quartzite fragments; 2 percent metal, 3 percent plastic, 10 percent gravel sized brick artifacts, 10 percent coal combustion products, 10 percent particulate  fly ash artifacts; slightly alkaline (pH 7.8); clear wavy boundary.

 ^Cu2--50 to 150 centimeters; dark brown (10YR 3/3) very artifactual sandy loam; massive: friable; 2 percent glauconite pellets; 5 percent asphalt, 5 percent glass, 10 percent concrete, 25 percent brick artifacts; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0).

TYPE LOCATION: Camden County, New Jersey; in a grassed field in a park off Pine Street approximately 1,200 feet northeast of a high school approximately 500 feet south of the Cooper River in Camden, NJ.

Latitude: 39.938611
Longitude: -75.0994444
Datum: WGS84
U.S.G.S. Quad: Camden, NJ

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Thickness of human-transported materials--greater than 50 cm, typically greater than 100cm
Depth to seasonal high-water table--between 50 and 100 centimeters.
Rock fragment content--0 to 15 percent, by volume throughout.
Artifact content--15 to 60 percent, by volume throughout.  Some pedons have particulate size artifacts such as fly ash mixed in the soil matrix.
Glauconite pellets--0 to 8 percent by volume throughout.
Fine-Earth Fraction--averages less than 18 percent clay and greater than 40 percent sand in the particle size control section.

^Au or ^A horizons, (if present):
Hue--10YR
Value--2 to 4 
Chroma--2 to 4
Texture--loamy sand or sandy loam, in the fine earth fraction
Human-Artifacts--0 to 15 percent
Rock Fragments-0 to 8 percent

^Cu or ^C horizons:
Hue--7.5YR or 10YR
Value--3 to 6
Chroma--2 to 8
Texture--coarse sand, loamy sand, loamy coarse sand, fine sandy loam, sandy loam, loam in the fine earth fraction
Human Artifacts-typically 25 to 60 percent, some pedons have individual horizons with less than 25 percent artifacts.
Rock Fragments--0 to 15 percent

COMPETING SERIES: There are no competing series.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landscape--North Atlantic coastal plain
Landform--filled, raised land, dumps, or other anthropogenic alterations on areas of drainageways, alluvial soils, marshes, or wet soils.  
Parent Material--loamy-skeletal human transported materials consisting of construction debris and other artifacts
Slope--0 to 5 percent
Elevation--1 to 20 meters
Frost-free period--190 to 250 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature--11 to 14 degrees C.
Mean Annual Precipitation--1145 to 1225 millimeters

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
Buddtown soils--have less than 50 centimeters of human-transported materials, on slightly higher non-anthropogenic landforms.
Cramerhill soils--well drained and less than 35 percent human artifacts, on slightly higher adjacent anthropogenic landforms.
Freehold soils--well drained, have less than 50 cm of human-transported materials, on higher non-anthropogenic landforms.
Mannington soils--very poorly drained tidally inundated, on tidal marshes.
Nanticoke soils--very poorly drained tidally inundated, on tidal marshes.
Northmont soils--have less than 35 percent human artifacts throughout and have an argillic horizon below the human-transported material, on similar anthropogenic landforms.
Secaucus soils-are derived from parent materials associated with a glaciated landscape such as glacial till or outwash, on similar anthropogenic landforms.
Swedesboro soils--well drained, have less than 50 cm of human-transported materials, on higher non-anthropogenic landforms.

DRAINAGE AND SATURATED HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY:
Drainage Class--moderately well drained
Surface Runoff--low, moderate to high in areas that have been compacted. 
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity Class--moderately high except where compacted mechanically (vibratory) or static (heavy traffic).

USE AND VEGETATION:
Major Uses--These soils are used for residential, commercial, and recreational development in an urban or suburban setting.
Vegetation--Vegetation may include a mix of managed and unmanaged plant communities with a mix of native and non-native species. Many areas are vegetated with non-native ornamental landscaping and/or turfgrass associated with developed land uses. Some areas may exhibit weedy, invasive, and/or primary succession vegetation communities (e.g., abandoned lots and other unmanaged areas). Some small patches of mixed native hardwood forest may be present in undisturbed areas.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
General Area--Urban corridors with human-modified landscapes
Land Resource Regions--S - North Atlantic Slope Diversified Farming Region MLRA--149A
Extent--small extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina (Special Projects Region)

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Camden County, New Jersey, 2024.

REMARKS:
Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
Ochric epipedon--the zone from a depth of 0 to 21 centimeters (^Au horizon)
Aquic conditions-the zone from a depth of 50 to 150 centimeters (^Cu2 horizon)
Artifacts-the zone from a depth of 0 to 150 centimeters (^Au and ^Cu horizons)
Human-transported materials--the zone from a depth of 0 to 150 centimeters. (^Au and ^Cu horizons)

Redoximorphic features may be absent in the human-transported materials in some pedons with other hydrology indicators.

ADDITIONAL DATA:

NASIS User Pedon ID: 2012NJ007016
Classified using the Thirteenth Edition Keys to Soil Taxonomy (2022)
____________________________________
National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
