LOCATION SCHNEBLY               AZ

Established Series
Rev. WMJ
03/2007

SCHNEBLY SERIES

The Schnebly series consists of well drained, moderately deep, fine textured Reddish Brown soils formed in reddish clayey residuum from basalt.  They are on hillsides and colluvial slopes with grass-shrub vegetation.  Schnebly soils form at elevations of about 4,000 feet in areas with continental climate characterized by average annual precipitation of about 13 inches and mean annual temperature of about 60 degrees F.  Slopes are 5 to 20 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, superactive, thermic Typic Paleargids

TYPICAL PEDON:   Schnebly very stony clay loam (virgin).

     A--0 to 4 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/3) very stony clay loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) when moist; weak thin platy structure; soft, friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; roots abundant; neutral (pH 7.2); clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 5 inches thick)

     Bt1--4 to 14 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) dry and moist; stony clay prismatic structure breaks to moderate fine angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm, sticky, plastic; which has abundant roots; few small pores; thin continuous clay films; neutral (pH 7.0); clear smooth boundary. (4 to 14 inches thick)

     Btss--14 to 22 inches; reddish brown (2.5YR 4/4) clay, dark reddish brown (2.5YR 3/4) when moist; strong very fine blocky structure; very hard, very firm, very sticky, very plastic; thick continuous clay films; very few, if any, visible pores; few slickensides; roots plentiful; slightly alkaline (pH 7.4); clear wavy boundary. (4 to 10 inches thick)

     Btk--22 to 25 inches; mottled light reddish brown (2.5YR 6/4) and reddish brown (2.5YR 5/4) clay, dark red (2.5YR 3/6) when moist; weak fine blocky structure; hard friable, sticky, plastic; few roots; thin patchy clay films; highly calcareous with lime segregations; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); (6 to 16 inches thick)

     R--25 inches plus; basalt, some of which is lime coated along cracks.

TYPE LOCATION:  NE 1/4, sec. 23, T. 16N., R. 5E., Yavapai County, Arizona

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  

Soil moisture: Typic aridic moisture regime.

The thickness of the solum and the degree of B2 development ranges considerable from place to place.

The profile is deeper and the degree of development is greater on the colluvial slopes than on hillsides not affected with colluvial material.

Depth to bedrock: about 20 to about 36 inches.

Hue: 5YR to 2.5YR

Texture: clay, silty clay, or stony clay.

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Tubac series. Tubac soils are very deep.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Schnebly soils form at elevations of about 4,000 feet in areas with continental climate characterized by average annual precipitation of about 13 inches and mean annual temperature of about 60 degrees F.  The January mean temperature is about 41 degrees F., the July mean about 78 degrees F. and the average annual frost-free period is about 200 days. Sloping (5 to 20 percent) hillsides and colluvial slopes.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well-drained.  Moderately slow to slow permeability; medium infiltration; medium to rapid runoff.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Dominantly winter range for livestock.  Mainly side-oats grama with some cacti, mesquite, turbinella oak, juniper and some tobosa grass.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Schnebly soils are inextensive and unimportant.  They are known to date only in Arizona.   MLRA 38.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Beaver Creek Area, Arizona, 1965.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
