LOCATION SHINGLETOWN            CA

Tentative Series
Rev. SBJ/RCH
09/2006

SHINGLETOWN SERIES

The Shingletown Series is a member of a fine, mixed, mesic family of Aquic Argixerolls.  The soils have brown and dark grayish brown loam A horizons and very pale brown mottled heavy sandy clay loam Bt horizons.  Reaction is about slightly acid in the A to neutral in the lower B.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Aquic Argixerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Shingletown loam - meadow.  (Colors are for dry conditions unless otherwise noted)

     A11--0 to 6 inches; Brown (10YR 4/3) loam, dark brown (10YR 3/3) moist; massive; soft, very friable, nonsticky, slightly plastic; abundant very fine roots; many medium and few fine tubular pores; 0 to 1 inch is sandy loam; medium acid (pH 6.0); clear smooth boundary. 4 to 8 inches thick.

     A12--6 to 16 inches; Dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) loam with common fine distinct yellowish red mottles, very dark brown (10YR 2/3) moist; massive; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; few very fine roots; few fine and common medium tubular pores; slightly acid (pH 6.5); clear smooth boundary. 8 to 12 inches thick.

     B11--16 to 34 inches; Light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) loam with common fine distinct strong brown and dark brown mottles; dark brown (10YR 4/3); moist; massive; slightly hard; friable, slightly sticky slightly plastic; abundant fine and medium roots; many fine tubular pores; few thin clay films in pores; slightly acid (pH 6.5); diffuse smooth boundary. 12 to 20 inches thick.

     B12--34 to 46 inches; Pale brown (10YR 6/3) heavy sandy loam with common fine faint, light yellowish brown mottles, dark brown (10YR 4/3) moist; massive; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; few fine roots; common very fine, fine and medium tubular pores; few thin clay films in pores; neutral (pH 6.7); clear smooth boundary. 10 to 14 inches thick.

     B2t--46 to 59 inches; Very pale brown (10YR 7/3) heavy sandy clay loam with common medium distinct brownish yellow mottles brown (10YR 5/3) (rubbed) moist; strong coarse angular blocky structure; hard, firm, sticky, plastic; many fine and medium tubular, few fine interstitial pores; common moderately thick clay films in pores and common thin clay films on ped faces; neutral (pH 7.0); abrupt smooth boundary. 10 to 18 inches thick.

B3t--59 to 65 inches; Light gray (10YR 7/2) gravelly clay loam with common medium distinct yellowish brown mottles, brown (10YR 5/3) moist; massive; hard, firm, sticky, plastic; common very fine and fine tubular, many very fine interstitial pores; common moderately thick clay films in pores and many moderately thick clay films on ped faces; neutral (pH 6.7).

TYPE LOCATION: Shasta County, California about 3 1/2 miles west of McCumber Reservoir on Poorman Plat. 1/4 mile NW
of the S 1/4 corner of Sec. 7, T.31N, R.2E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness is 44 to 72 inches to the bottom of Bt horizon and mean annual soil temperature ranges from 50 F to 54 F. The A horizon colors are very dark gray to grayish brown in 10YR and 2.5Y hues and have values of 3 to 5 dry and 2 to 3 moist.  Chromas are 1 to 3 moist or dry. Texture ranges from loam to silt loam that may be
slightly gravelly. Structure is granular to massive and consistence is soft to slightly hard. Reaction is medium acid (pH 6.0) to mildly alkaline. The Bt horizons range in color from dark gray to very pale brown dry (10YR) and are about two units of value darker when moist.  Texture is heavy sandy clay loam to light clay and reaction is slightly acid to mildly alkaline. The All horizon is free of mottles but the lower horizons have distinct mottles.

COMPETING SERIES AND THEIR DIFFERENTIAE: These include the Buntingville, Chummy and Childs series. The Buntingville soils have dark gray Al horizons and dark gray calcareous Bt horizons at 8 inches of depth. The Chummy soils are medium to strongly acid and lack argillic horizons. The Childs soils are strongly to medium acid above the Bt horizon and lack mottles in the Bt and above.

SETTING: The Shingletown soils occur in gently sloping to nearly level mountain valleys under grasses, sedges and wiregrass. Underlying alluvium was derived mostly from basic volcanic rocks. The soils occur at elevations ranging from 1500 to 5500 feet in a humid mesothermal climate with mean annual rainfall of 40 to 50 inches, with warm dry summers and cold wet winters. Mean annual temperature is about 48 F, average January temperature about 32 F, and average July temperature about 64 F.

PRINCIPAL ASSOCIATED SOILS: Shingletown soils occur in the same general area as the Aiken, Cohasset, Jiggs, Lyonsville, McCarthy, Nanny, Sites, and Windy soils.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Somewhat poorly to/poorly drained, permeability is slow, runoff is slow; erosion hazard is slight.

USE AND VEGETATION: Pasture, usually irrigated. Natural vegetation is perennial and annual grasses, sedges, wiregrass, and invading ponderosa pines on drier areas.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Mountain meadows in Cascade Range of northern California. The soils are inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Davis, California

SERIES PROPOSED: Shasta Area, California 1965. Name from Shingletown in Shasta County.

REMARKS: The Shingletown series was formerly classified in the Brunizem group. The soils have mollic epipedons, argillic horizons and mottling in the lower part of the mollic epipedon.

OSED scanned by SSQA.  Last revised by state on 2/66.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
