LOCATION SHOTGUN                ID

Established Series
Rev. RJG/CLM
05/2001

SHOTGUN SERIES

The Shotgun series consists of moderately deep, well drained soils on loess covered basalt plains.  Permeability is moderate.  Slopes range from 1 to 12 percent.  The average annual precipitation is about 25 inches and the average annual temperature is about 36 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive Xeric Argicryolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Shotgun loam - on a 1 percent concave slope.  When described on August 28, 1979, the soil was dry.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

     A--0 to 7 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; weak fine granular structure; soft, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many fine, common medium, and few coarse roots; 3 percent pebbles; neutral (pH 6.6); clear smooth boundary.  (3 to 10 inches thick)

     BA--7 to 14 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) loam, dark brown (10YR 3/3) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few fine and common medium roots; few fine and medium tubular pores; 5 percent pebbles and cobbles; moderately acid (pH 5.9); clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 13 inches thick)

     Bt--14 to 30 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) loam, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few fine and common medium roots; few fine and medium tubular pores; common thin clay films on ped faces and in pores; 10 percent pebbles and cobbles; moderately acid (pH 5.9); abrupt wavy boundary.  (12 to 18 inches thick)

     2R--30 inches; unweathered vesicular basalt.

TYPE LOCATION:  Fremont County, Idaho; about 22 miles east of Kilgore; 2,400 feet south and 100 feet west of the northeast corner, sec. 21, T.13N., R.42E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Depth to bedrock and thickness of solum - 20 to 40 inches Thickness of mollic epipedon - 12 to 16 inches
Clay content of control section - 20 to 27 percent
Coarse fragments in control section - 5 to 10 percent
Average annual soil temperature - 38 to 40 degrees F

A horizon
Color value, dry - 3 or 4
Value, moist - 2 or 3
Chroma - 2 or 3, dry or moist
Reaction - slightly acid or neutral

B horizon
Color hue - 10YR or 7.5YR
Value, dry - 4 to 6
Value, moist - 2 to 4
Chroma - 2 to 4, dry or moist
Texture - SIL, L
Reaction - moderately acid through neutral

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Amsden, Buffork, Cific, Croydon, Dra, Gelke, Hourglass, Inchau, Kezar, Kittredge, Leavitt, Lucky, Lymanson, Lyonman, Michelson, Miracle, Monad, Monida(T), Morset, Mult, Newlands, Oro Fino, Passcreek, Philipsburg, Primeaux, Rammel, Slacks(T), Swede, Tingey, Tripit, Troutdale, Wellsville, Woosley, and Youga series.  The Amsden, Buffork, Cific, Croydon, Gelkie, Hourglass, Kittredge, Leavitt, Lyoman, Michelson, Monad, Monida, Morset, Newlands, Oro Fino, Philipsburg, Swede, Tingey, Wellsville, and Youga soils are deeper than 40 inches.  The Inchau, Lymanson, Tripit, and Troutdale soils have a paralithic contact at depths of less than 40 inches.  The Dra, Lymanson, Passcreek, Rammel, and Woosley soils have layers in the profile which contain calcium carbonate.  Kezar soils are extremely hard when dry and have sandy textures in the profile.  Lucky soils have average annual soil temperatures of 40 to 44 degrees F. and have more than 35 percent fine and coarser sand in the particle-size control section.  Miracle soils have hues of 5YR or redder in the argillic horizon.  Mult soils are usually moist.  Primeaux soils have an anverage annual soil teperature which is greater than 40 degrees F.  Slacks soils have more than 35 percent fine and coarser sand in the particle-size control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Shotgun soils are on basalt plains with concave and convex surfaces.  Slopes are 1 to 12 percent.  The soils formed in loess.  Average annual precipitation is 25 to 30 inches.  Average annual temperature is 36 to 38 degrees F.  Frost-free season is 30 to 50 days.  Elevation ranges from 6,420 to 6,550 feet.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Fourme, Judkins, and Spliten soils.  Fourme soils lack bedrock within 40 inches and formed in alluvium.  Judkins soils have ochric epipedons and are loamy-skeletal.  They formed from rhyolite or basalt under forested conditions.  Spliten soils are shallow.  They formed in loess deposits on steeper slopes of more recent basalt flows.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; very slow or slow runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Rangeland and wildlife habitat.  Principal vegetation consists of mountain big sagebrush, Idaho fescue, mountain brome, arrowleaf balsamroot, and lupine.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Shotgun soils are of small extent.  They are in eastern Idaho.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Fremont County, Idaho, 1989.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface to 14 inches (A and BA horizons).

Particle-size control section - the zone from 14 inches to bedrock (Bt horizon).



National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
