LOCATION SHUBUTA                MS+AL AR FL LA TN

Established Series
Rev. HLN:WMK:RBH
10/2018

SHUBUTA SERIES

The Shubuta series consists of well drained soils that formed in clayey sediment.  Permeability is moderately slow.  These gently sloping to strongly sloping soils are on uplands of the Southern Coastal Plain, slopes range from 1 to 12 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, semiactive, thermic Typic Paleudults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Shubuta fine sandy loam - woodland.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     A--0 to 3 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) fine sandy loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; many fine roots; medium acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (0 to 7 inches thick)

     E--3 to 8 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) fine sandy loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; few fine roots; medium acid; clear wavy boundary.  (4 to 12 inches thick)

     Bt1--8 to 18 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/8) clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; sand grains coated and bridged with clay; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bt2--18 to 33 inches; red (2.5YR 4/6) clay; few fine distinct strong brown mottles in lower part; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots; thin continuous clay films on faces of peds; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bt3--33 to 42 inches; mottled red (2.5YR 4/6) strong brown (7.5YR 5/6), and pale brown (10YR 6/3) clay; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots; thin continuous clay films on faces of peds; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bt4--42 to 52 inches; mottled red (2.5YR 4/6), gray (10YR 6/1), and strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) clay loam; moderate medium subangular and angular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots; few pockets of sandy loam; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bt5--52 to 70 inches; mottled gray (10YR 6/1) and red (2.5YR 4/8) clay; moderate coarse subangular and angular blocky structure; firm; few pockets of uncoated sand; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; few thin shale fragments; very strongly acid.  (Combined thickness of Bt is 55 to 80 inches)

TYPE LOCATION:  Jasper County, Mississippi; 2.5 miles northeast of Bay Springs, Mississippi, on State Highway 18 and 1/8 mile north into woods.  SW1/4NW1/4 sec. 23, T. 2 N., R. 10 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 60 to 90 inches.  Reaction is strongly or very strongly acid in all horizons except the surface layers that have been limed.  Few to common mica flakes are in many pedons.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 3 or 4 and chroma of 2.  Texture is sandy loam, fine sandy loam, loam or loamy sand.

The E horizon and Ap horizon, when present, has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 through 6, chroma 2 through 8.  Texture is sandy loam, fine sandy loam, loam or loamy sand.

The upper Bt1 and Bt2 have hue of 2.5YR value of 4 or 5, chroma of 4 through 8.  Texture is clay, clay loam or sandy clay.  Some pedons have thin Bt1 horizons that have hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 6 through 8.  Texture is sandy clay loam or clay loam.

The Bt3, Bt4 and Bt5 have similar colors and, in addition, have hue of 7.5YR, value of 5 or 6, chroma of 6 through 8 with brown, gray, and olive mottles, or it is mottled with gray, red, and brown.  Texture is clay, clay loam or sandy clay.  Some pedons have a heavy sandy clay loam texture in the lower Bt horizon.  Secondary eluviation is present in the less clayey textures.  The upper 20 inches of the Bt horizon ranges from 35 to 55 percent clay.

COMPETING SERIES:  These include the Caroline and Tuberville in the same family.  Series in similar families include the Boswell, Esto, Faceville, Greenville, Kirvin, Luverne, Maben, McQueen, Neshoba, Sacul, Sweatman, Tiak, and Williamsville.  Caroline soils have browner B horizons and stratified lower horizons.  Tuberville soils have red or dark red lower Bt horizons that are not mottles.  Boswell soils have more plastic clays, higher shrink-swell and higher percentage base saturation.  Esto, Faceville, and Greenville soils have kaolinitic mineralogy.  Esto soils are not as red and Greenville soils have dark red Bt horizons.  Kirvin, Luverne, Maben, and Sweatman soils have sola less than 60 inches thick.  McQueen soils have less clayey lower Bt horizons and lack evidence of secondary eluviation.  Neshoba soils have dark red Bt horizons.  Sacul soils have less clayey lower Bt horizons and grayish mottles in the upper Bt horizon.  Tiak soils have grayish mottles in the upper Bt horizon.  Williamsville soils have lower Bt horizons that are less clayey.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  These gently sloping to strongly sloping soils are on the uplands of the Southern Coastal Plain.  Slopes ranges from 1 to 12 percent.  They formed in material weathered from marine or stream deposited clayey sediment.  The climate is warm and humid.  Near the type location the mean annual temperature is about 62 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 53 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Boswell, Luverne, and Sweatman series and the Bama, Heidel, McLaurin, Ora, Savannah, and Smithdale series.  Boswell is on similar landscapes.  Luverne and Sweatman are on higher positions.  Bama, Heidel, McLaurin and Smithdale have less clayey control sections and are on higher positions.  Ora and Savannah have fragipans and are generally in higher positions.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; moderately slow permeability; and medium to rapid runoff.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most of the soil is in forest of mixed hardwoods and pine.  Cleared areas are used for growing corn, cotton, hay, soybeans, pasture, and truck crops.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern Coastal Plain of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennessee.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Auburn, Alabama

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Jefferson County, Florida; 1939.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of approximately 8 inches (A1, E horizon).

Argillic horizon - the zone from approximately 8 to 70 inches (Bt1, Bt2, Bt3, Bt4, Bt5 horizon).

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Pedon has been analyzed by Mississippi Agricultural and Forestry Experiment Station.  Chemical and physics data are available, Laboratory numbers 1350-1356.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
