LOCATION SIDELING               MD PA VA WV

Established Series
PSK-JSK-REP
03/2001

SIDELING SERIES

The Sideling series consists of very deep, moderately well drained, and are moderately slow to slowly permeable. They form in colluvium derived from acid sandstone over shale residuum. They occur on footslopes and colluvial fans below ridges capped by sandstone.  Slopes range from 3 to 45 percent. Mean annual precipitation is 44 inches and mean annual temperature is 54 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, semiactive, mesic Oxyaquic Hapludults

TYPICAL PEDON: Sideling very stony loam, on west facing, concave, strongly sloping, Oak Hickory forest. (Colors are for moist soil.)

 Oi--0 to 2 inches; partially decomposed leaves, twigs, and roots, 2 percent stones on and in surface layer. (O to 3)

 A--2 to 4 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4) very stony loam, moderate tine granular structure; very friable; many fine and medium roots; few fine tubular and vesicular pores; 20 percent sandstone gravel's and 2 percent sandstone stones; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (2 to 10 inches thick)

 BE--4 to 12 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) gravelly loam, moderate fine and medium sub-angular blocky structure; friable; many fine and medium, common coarse roots; many fine and medium, common coarse tubular pores; few faint clay films on faces of peds; 15 percent sandstone gravel, and 1 percent sandstone flags; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (O to 15 inches thick)

 Btl--12 to 29 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) gravelly loam, moderate medium sub-angular blocky structure; friable; many fine roots; many fine tubular and vesicular pores; common distinct clay films in pores, on faces of peds and on rock fragments; 15 percent sandstone gravel and 1 percent sandstone fragments; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

 Bt2--29 to 38 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) gravelly clay loam, moderate medium sub-angular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots; few fine vesicular and tubular pores; many distinct clay films in pores and on faces of peds; 25 percent sandstone gravel's, 5 percent shale channers, and 2 percent sandstone cobbles; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

 2Bt3--38 to 55 inches; yellowish red (5YR 5/8) channery silty clay loam; common fine and medium prominent grayish brown (10YR 5/2) iron depletions, common medium distinct strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) iron accumulations, common coarse prominent light yellowish brown (2.5Y 6/4) mottles, moderate coarse sub-angular blocky structure parting to weak thin platy; friable; few fine roots; few fine vesicular and tubular pores; many distinct clay films in pores and on faces of peds, and on rock fragments; few fine and medium black (10YR 2/1) iron and manganese masses; 5 percent sandstone gravel and 15 percent shale channers; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (combined thickness 20 to 50 inches)

 2BC--55 to 74 inches; yellowish red (5YR 5/6) channery clay loam; common medium prominent light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) iron depletions and common medium prominent yellowish brown (10YR5/8) iron accumulation; weak medium sub-angular blocky structure; friable; few medium vesicular pores; common distinct clay films in pores, on faces of peds and on rock fragments; 5 percent sandstone gravel and 25 percent shale channers; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (6 to 25 inches thick)

TYPE LOCATION: Washington County, Maryland; 5.2 miles north of ATT tower access road and its over pass of Lanes Run. East of Lanes Run 400 feet, in the Forsythe area.  Lat. 39 degrees 42' 29" and Long. 77 degrees 57' 37"

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness ranges from 40 to 60 inches. Depth to lithologic discontinuity is 30 to 60 inches.  Lithic contact greater than 60 inches. Content of rock fragments ranges from 10 to 45 percent in the solum and 15 to 60 percent in the substratum. Rock fragments consist of sandstone gravels, cobbles, and stones in the upper solum.  Channers and flags from acid and calcareous shales are dominant in the lower solum and substratum.  Rock fragments are less than 35 percent in the particle size control section. The soil ranges from slightly acid too extremely acid throughout.

The A horizon, has hue of IOYR, value of 2 through 4, chroma of 1 through 3. Texture is silt loam or loam in the fine earth fraction. Reaction ranges from very strongly acid to moderately acid.  (where unlimed)

The Ap horizon, where present, has hue of 1OYR, value of 3 through 5, chroma 2 through 4. Texture silt loam or loam, in the fine earth fraction. Reaction ranges from moderately acid to slightly acid. (where limed)

The E horizon, where present, has hue of 1OYR, value of 4 through 6, chroma 4 through 8. Texture is silt loam or loam in the fine earth fraction. 

The BE horizon, where present, has hue of 1OYR of 7.5YR, value 4 through 6, chroma 4 through 8. Texture is silt loam or loam in the fine earth fraction.

The Bt horizon has hue of 5YR through 7.5YR, value 4 through 6, chroma 4 through 6. it is silt loam, loam, clay loam, and silty clay loam in the fine earth fraction.

The 2Bt horizon has hue of 2.5YR through 7.5YR, value 4 through 6, chroma 4 through 8. Texture is clay loam, silty clay loam, or clay in the fine earth fraction.  Depth to discontinuity ranges form 30 to 45 inches.

The 2BC horizon, where present, has hue of 5YR through 1OYR, value 4 through 6, chroma 4 through 8. Texture is loam, silt loam, silty clay loam, or clay loam in the fine earth fraction.

COMPETING SERIES: Brumbaugh soils in the only known soil in the same family. Soils in similar or closely related families are the Birdsboro, Chilmark, Hassler, Roselle, Thurmont, and Tulip series. The Brumbaugh and Thurmont soils formed in colluvium from metamorphic rocks and have a lithologic discontinuity from 30 to 60 inches.   Chilmark soils formed in a loamy or sandy aeolian mantle over coastal plain sediments on the islands of Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard in MLRA 149B. Hassler soils are deep to granite bedrock and formed in colluvium and residuum on mountain ridges in the Ozark Highland area (MLRA 116A). Roselle soils formed in colluvium and residuum from granite on terraces and footslopes in mountain basins in the Ozark Highland area (MLRA 116A).  Tulip soils formed in colluvium from sandstone and siltstone and in residuum from underlying shale in south central Indiana (MLRA 120). The Birdsboro soils formed in old alluvial deposits from shale, sandstone, or siltstone.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Sideling soils are on footslopes and colluvial fans below ridges capped by sandstone. They form in acid sandstone colluvium over shale residuum. Slopes range from 3 to 45 percent. Mean annual precipitation ranges from 40 to 46inches. Mean annual temperature ranges from 48 to 56 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: Berks, Buchannan, Calvin, Dekalb, Hazelton, and Weikert soils are on adjacent landscapes. The Berks, Calvin, Dekalb, and Weikert soils are moderately deep or shallow to bedrock and are formed in residuum. Buchanna soils have a Fragipan.  Hazelton soils are well drained.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Moderately well drained. Permeability is moderately slow in the upper solum and slow in the lower solum and substratum. Run off is slow on gentle slopes and high on steeper slopes. 

USE AND VEGETATION: Most of these soils are in Oak Hickory forest. Areas that are gently or strongly sloping may be pastured or in orchard.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and West Virginia. The soils of this series are not extensive. (MLRA147)

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES PROPOSED: Washington County, Maryland, 1995.

REMARKS:  
1. ochric epipedon from 0 to 4 inches.
2. Argillic horizon from 18 to 55 inches and has redoximorphic features below 38 inches.
3. Additional CEC class identified: active

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
