LOCATION SIMEON                 NE+KS

Established Series
LGR-RRZ-CJH
06/2022

SIMEON SERIES

The Simeon series consists of very deep, excessively drained soils with rapid permeability.  These soils formed in sandy alluvium and outwash material.  Slopes range from 0 to 30 percent.  Mean annual air temperature is about 50 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is about 22 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Mixed, mesic Typic Ustipsamments

TYPICAL PEDON:  Simeon loamy sand - on a 2 percent convex south-facing slope in rangeland.  When described, the soil was moist throughout.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated)

   A--0 to 8 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) loamy sand, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; weak very fine granular structure parting to single grain; soft, very friable; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

   AC--8 to 11 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) sand, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; single grain; loose; neutral; clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 10 inches thick)

   C--11 to 80 inches; very pale brown (10YR 8/2) sand, light gray (10YR 7/2) moist; single grain; loose; 2 to 10 percent by volume of gravel; neutral.

TYPE LOCATION:  Howard County, Nebraska; 2 miles south and 1 mile west of St. Paul, Nebraska; 0.1 mile south and 300 feet east of northwest corner, sec. 21, T. 14 W., R. 10 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Soil moisture: The soil moisture control section is moist in some part from October through April; intermittently moist from May through July; driest in July through September
Thickness of the solum: 7 to 20 inches
Depth to carbonates: more than 80 inches

A horizon:
Hue: 10YR
Value: 3 to 6 dry, 2 to 5 moist
Chroma: 1 to 3
Texture: loamy fine sand, loamy sand or sand, but includes fine sand, sandy loam or loam
Reaction: slightly acid to slightly alkaline
Organic matter content: averages less than 1 percent

AC horizon:
Hue: 10YR or 2.5Y
Value: 4 to 7 dry, 4 to 6 moist
Chroma: 2 or 3
Textures: sand or loamy sand with more than 35 percent medium and coarse sand and loamy coarse sand or coarse sand
Reaction: slightly acid to slightly alkaline

C horizon:
Hue: 10YR or 2.5Y
Value: 6 to 8 dry, 5 to 7 moist
Chroma: 2 or 4
Texture: sand or loamy sand than 35 percent medium and coarse sand and loamy coarse sand or coarse sand
Rock Fragments: rounded, granitic gravels, 2-75mm in size, up to 15 percent by volume
Reaction: slightly acid to slightly alkaline

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Duda, McKelvie, Peji, Tivin, Tonalea and Valentine series.  Duda and Peji soils have sandstone at depths between 20 and 40 inches.  McKelvie soils average less than 35 percent medium and coarse sand in the particle size control section and have sandstone gravel in the pedon. Tivin soils have a higher mean annual temperature and higher mean annual precipitation.  Tonalea soils are moderately deep over sandstone. Valentine soils have particle size control sections of fine sand to loamy fine sand.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Simeon soils typically are on terraces along major streams and less frequently on uplands.  Slope gradients range from 0 to 30 percent. These soils formed in sandy alluvium or outwash material. In some places the surface has been reworked by the wind into an undulating topography.  The mean annual air temperature ranges from 47 to 52 degrees F, and the mean annual precipitation ranges from about 18 to 24 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Valentine soils and the Dunday, Meadin and Oneill soils.  Valentine soils occur on nearly level to steep slopes above Simeon soils.  Dunday soils have mollic epipedons and occur on nearly level to strongly sloping areas generally above Simeon soils.  Meadin soils are on similar landscapes, have a mollic epipedon and have a sandy-skeletal control section.  Oneill soils are typically on higher, less sloping areas.  They have a mollic epipedon and have a coarse-loamy over sandy or sandy-skeletal control section.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Excessively drained.  Permeability is rapid.   Runoff is very low to medium.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most of these soils are in native grass and used for range.  The native vegetation is mainly short and mid prairie grasses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Central Nebraska, possibly south central South Dakota and north central Kansas.  The series is of moderate extent.  Estimated extent is 20,000 to 40,000 acres.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Salina, Kansas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Cherry County, Nebraska, 1954.

REMARKS:  Simeon soils were formerly mapped in the Meadin series in some areas.  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: ochric epipedon--the zone from 0 to 8 inches (A horizon).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
