LOCATION SKAGWAY                AK

Established Series
Rev. JWM/JPM
02/2022

SKAGWAY SERIES

The Skagway series consists of very deep, somewhat poorly drained soils that formed in alluvium.  Skagway soils occur on floodplains and outwash plains.  Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent.  The mean annual temperature is about 42 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation is about 47 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Mixed Typic Cryopsamments

TYPICAL PEDON:  Skagway fine sandy loam - on a nearly level floodplain at 200 feet elevation under forest vegetation.  (All colors are for moist soil unless otherwise indicated).

    Oi--4 to 2 inches; mat of mostly undecomposed leaves and moss.  (1 to 3 inches thick).

    Oe--2 inches to 0; mat of moderately decomposed leaves and moss.  (0 to 2 inches thick).

    A--0 to 2 inches;  dark brown (10YR 3/3) fine sandy loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; very friable; nonsticky and nonplastic; many very fine, fine, medium, and coarse roots; slightly effervescent; mildly alkaline (pH 7.4); abrupt smooth boundary.  (0 to 4 inches thick).

    C1--2 to 17 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) and yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) loamy fine sand; single grain; loose; nonsticky and nonplastic; common fine, medium, and coarse roots; slightly effervescent; mildly alkaline (pH 7.4); clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 60 inches thick).

    C2--17 to 60 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) loamy fine sand; single grain; loose; nonsticky and nonplastic; common fine and medium roots decreasing to few fine roots with depth; slightly effervescent, mildly alkaline (pH 7.4).

TYPE LOCATION:  Haines Area, Alaska; NW1/4 SW1/4 section 21,  .28S., R.54E., Copper River Meridian.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISITCS:  Texture of the 10 to 40 inch control section is sand or loamy fine sand.  Coarse fragment content in the control section ranges from 0 to 20 percent.  Depth to the water table is commonly below 40 inches but will raise to within 20 to 30 inches of the soil surface for more than two weeks during the growing season.  Reaction througout the profile is slightly acid to moderately alkaline.

The A horizon, when present, has hue of 2.5Y, 10YR, or 7.5YR, value from 3 through 5 moist and chroma from 2 through 4 moist.  Texture is silt loam, sandy loam, or fine sandy loam.  Coarse fragment content ranges from 0 to 10 percent with 0 to 10 percent gravel and 0 to 5 percent cobble.

The C horizons have hue of 5Y, 2.5Y, or 10YR, value from 3 through 5 moist, and chroma from 2 through 4 moist.  Texture is loamy fine sand or sand.  Thin lenses of silt occur in some profiles.  Coarse fragment content ranges from 0 to 20 percent with 0 to 20 percent gravel and 0 to 5 percent cobble.  Reaction to 10 percent HCl ranges from slightly to strongly effervescent.

COMPETING SERIES:  This the Blackcup (T), Kunayosh (T), Mystem, Teklanika (T), and Witefels soils.  Blackcup (T) soils have stony or bouldery surfaces and are strongly or very strongly acid.  Kunayosh (T), Mystem, and Teklanika (T) soils are noncalcareous throughout the profile.  Witefels soils have a paralithic contact within 20 to 40 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Skagway soils occur on floodplains and outwash plains.  The soils formed in alluvium consisting of calcareous sand.  The climate is humid maritime with the average annual precipitation ranging from 21 to 60 inches.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 40 to 44 degrees F.  The frost free season is 90 to 150 days.  Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent.  Elevations range from 0 to 1000 feet.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the Ashmun, Funter, Hollow, Lutak, and Tsirku soils.  Ashmun, Hollow, and Tsirku soils occur on adjacent floodplains.  Ashmun soils are poorly drained, Hollow soils are shallow over extremely gravelly sand, and Tsirku soils have a coarse-loamy control section.  Funter soils consist of peat and occur in muskegs.  Lutak soils occur on alluvial terraces and moraines and have a spodic horizon.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat poorly drained; rapid permeability; slow runoff; these soils are subject to frequent flooding.

USE AND VEGETATION:  The Skagway soils are used for wildlife habitat, recreation, and some timber production.  The native vegetation is dominantly cottonwood with an understory of Sitka alder, devil's club, horsetail, and mosses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southeastern Alaska.  The series is of minor extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: WASILLA, ALASKA

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Haines Area, Alaska.  1985.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic features recognized in this soil are:  loamy fine sand from 2 to 60 inches.


National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
