LOCATION SPEER                  OK

Established Series
Rev. JWF:BTB
11/2001

SPEER SERIES


The Speer series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils that formed in loamy sediments. These soils are on nearly level or very gently sloping flood plains or low terraces of major streams in the Ouachita Mountains, MLRA 119. Water runs off the surface slow to medium. Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, active, thermic Ultic Hapludalfs

TYPICAL PEDON: Speer loam, on a convex 1.5 percent slope, in pasture. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

	A--0 to 9 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) loam; weak medium and fine granular structure; friable; many fine roots; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary. (6 to 12 inches thick)

	BA--9 to 15 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) loam; weak medium and fine granular structure; friable; many fine roots; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary. (0 to 10 inches thick)

	Bt1--15 to 24 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; nearly continuous clay films on faces of peds; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary. (7 to 18 inches thick)

	Bt2--24 to 34 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) clay loam; weak medium and fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; nearly continuous clay films on faces of peds; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary. (4 to 26 inches thick)

	BC--34 to 55 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; patchy clay films on faces of peds; few medium distinct red (2.5YR 4/6) and yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) iron accumulations; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary. (0 to 30 inches thick)

	C--55 to 72 inches; coarsely variegated brownish yellow (10YR 6/8), yellowish brown (10YR 5/4), and light gray (10YR 7/1) loam; massive; friable; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION: Pushmataha County, Oklahoma; about 2 miles south of Moyers; 1,000 feet east and 300 feet north of the southwest corner of sec. 8, T. 3 S., R. 16 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness ranges from 40 to more than 60 inches.

The A horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 to 6, and chroma of 2 to 6. It is loam or fine sandy loam and ranges from neutral to strongly acid.

The BA horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 8. It is loam, fine sandy loam, sandy clay loam, or clay loam. It ranges from moderately to very strongly acid.

The Bt horizon has hue of 2.5YR to 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 4 to 8. It is sandy clay loam, loam, or clay loam. It ranges from moderately to very strongly acid.

The BC horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 1 to 8. It is loam or fine sandy loam. It ranges from moderately to very strongly acid. Some pedons have iron accumulations and depletions in shades of red, brown, and gray.

The C horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 4 to 7, and chroma of 1 to 6. Some pedons have iron accumulations and depletions in shades of red, brown, and gray. This horizon is loam or fine sandy loam and contains from 0 to 10 percent by volume coarse fragments less than 75 mm in diameter. Reaction ranges from slightly to very strongly acid.

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Kenefick, Kenn, and Wiville series. Kenefick soils have sola greater than 80 inches and are in mapped in the Western Gulf Coast Flatwoods (MLRA 152B). Kenn soils have more than 35 percent coarse fragments below the control section. Wiville soils have sola 60 to more than 80 inches thick and are mapped in the Southern Mississippi Valle Alluvium (MLRA 131).

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Speer soils are on nearly level or very gently sloping high flood plains and low terraces of major streams in the Ouachita Mountains. These soils are rarely flooded and, when flooded, receive very little sediment. Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent. Mean annual precipitation ranges from 42 to 56 inches and is evenly distributed throughout the year. Mean annual temperature ranges from 59 degrees to 66 degrees F. Thornthwaite annual P-E indices range from 70 to 76.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the competing Kenn series and the Avilla, Ceda, Cupco, Dela, Neff, and Rexor series. Kenn soils commonly occur upstream and closer to the source of sediments. Avilla soils are on adjacent terraces and have sola greater than 60 inches and lower base saturation. Ceda soils are on flood plains and have more than 35 percent rock fragments in the control section. Cupco and Neff soils have a fine silty control section. Cupco soils are somewhat poorly drained and Neff soils are moderately well drained. Dela soils do not have argillic horizons and are at lower elevations nearer the stream channel. Rexor soils are at lower elevations nearer the stream channel and are fine silty.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Speer soils are well drained. Runoff is medium to slow and permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION: Used mainly for tame pasture or for growing trees. The main trees are post oak, southern red oak, white oak, and a small amount of shortleaf pine.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Southeastern Oklahoma and possibly in Arkansas. The series is of minor extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Pushmataha County, Oklahoma; 1977.

REMARKS: These soils were formerly classified in the Red-Yellow Podzolic great soil group. They were formerly included in the Waynesboro and Sallisaw series.


National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
