LOCATION SPOOL                  WY+CO UT

Established Series
Rev. MCS
7/90

SPOOL SERIES

The Spool series is very shallow and shallow and excessively drained.  It formed in residuum, local alluvium, and eolian deposits.  Spool soils occur on gently sloping to steep bedrock controlled uplands.  Slopes are 6 to 50 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 12 inches, and the mean annual air temperature is about 40 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Mixed, frigid Lithic Torripsamments

TYPICAL PEDON:  Spool loamy sand - rangeland (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated).

     A--0 to 2 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) loamy sand, dark brown (10YR 4/3) moist; weak fine granular structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; common fine roots; mildly alkaline (pH 7.4); clear smooth boundary.  (1 to 4 inches thick)

     C--2 to 7 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) loamy sand, dark brown (10YR 4/3) moist; single grained; loose, nonsticky, nonplastic; few fine roots; mildly alkaline (pH 7.4); abrupt wavy boundary.  (2 to 16 inches thick)

     R--7 inches; hard noncalcareous sandstone.

TYPE LOCATION:  Carbon County, Wyoming, 2,640 feet north and 2,600 feet west of the southeast corner of section 12, T19N, R87W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Depth to a lithic contact ranges from 4 to 20 inches.  This soil is typically noncalcareous throughout but may have slight effervescence in the A horizon.  Content of gravel or channers ranges from 0 to 15 percent.  The mean annual soil temperature ranges from 40 to 47 degrees F.  The mean annual summer soil temperature ranges from 60 to 64 degrees F.  The particle size control section is loamy sand, sand, or fine sand.

The A and C horizons have hue of 5Y through 7.5YR, value of 5 through 7 dry, 3 through 6 moist, and chroma of 1 through 4.  Reactions are neutral or mildly alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are currently no competing series in the same family.  The Batterson and Tasselman soils are similar.  The Batterson series has redder colors and warmer soil temperatures.  The Tasselman series has a loamy particle-size control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Spool series occurs on gently sloping to steep bedrock controlled uplands.  Slopes are 6 to 50 percent.  The annual precipitation is 10 to 14 inches occurring mostly in the winter and spring months.  The mean annual soil temperature is about 44 degrees F.  The mean summer soil temperature is about 63 degrees F.  Elevation is 6,100 to 7,800 feet.  The frost-free period is 60 to 90 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Blackhall and Grieves soils.  The Blackhall soils have loamy textures and are calcareous.  The Grieves soils are deeper than 60 inches to bedrock and calcareous.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Excessively drained, slow to medium runoff; rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  This soil is used mostly for rangeland.  The vegetation is mainly pinyon, juniper, black sagebrush, and bluebunch wheatgrass.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Intermountain basins of southcentral and southwestern Wyoming.  This series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Bozeman, Montana

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Henrys Fork Soil Survey Area, Wyoming and Utah, 1990

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - 0 to 2 inches (A horizon)

Lithic contact - At 7 inches (R layer)

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
