LOCATION STATLER                TN+NC

Established Series
Rev. DLN
04/2001

STATLER SERIES

The Statler series consists of very deep well drained soils that formed in loamy alluvium.  These soils are on low terraces.  Slope is dominantly 0 to 5 percent but ranges up to 15 percent on narrow slopes leading down to the adjacent first bottoms.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, mesic Humic Hapludults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Statler loam, on a nearly level low terrace, in cultivation. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 8 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) loam; weak medium granular structure; very friable; many fine roots; few fine flakes of mica; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 10 inches thick)

     Bt1--8 to 13 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine roots; few fine flakes of mica; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.

     Bt2--13 to 24 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; thin discontinous clay films on faces of peds; few fine flakes of mica; strongly acid; graudal smooth boundary.

     Bt3--24 to 36 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) clay loam; moderate medium and fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; thin discontinuous clay films on faces of peds; common fine flakes of mica; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (combined thickness ofthe Bt horizon is 18 to 55 inches)

     BC--36 to 50 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; common fine flakes of mica; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (0 to 18 inches thick)

     C--50 to 65 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure to massive; common fine flakes of mica; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Polk County, Tennessee; on low terrace of Ocoee River; 400 yards north from U. S. Highway 64 bridge over river, and 400 feet east of river bank.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of solum ranges from about 30 to 80 inches.  The soil is moderately acid or strongly acid in each horizon except the surface layer is less acid where limed.  Limed soils tipically range from slightly acid to neutral in the upper part.  Very fine to medium size flakes of mica in each horizon range from few or none to common.  The amount of coarse fragments ranges from 0 to about 15 percent by volume in the A and B horizons and from 0 to about 30 percent in the C horizon.  Transitional horizons have colors and textures similar to adjacent horizons.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 2 to 4 . It is silt loam, loam, or fine sandy loam.

The Bt horizon has hue of 10YR to 5YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 3 to 8.  In some pedons, the lower part of the Bt horizon is mottled with shades of brown, yellow, and gray.  It is clay loam, silty clay loam, loam, sandy clay loam, or silt loam.  In some pedons, there are thin subhorizons of fine sandy loam.

The C horizon has the range of colors and texture given for the Bt horizon.  In many pedons it is mottled in shades of brown, yellow, and gray.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Royce, Saunook, and Trimont series.  Royce soils are dominantly 2.5YR.  Saunook soils have up to 35 percent rock fragments in the A and B horizons and up to 60 percent in the C horizon.  Trimont soils have up to 35 percent rock fragments and have C horizons of Saprolite.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Statler soils are on level to sloping low terraces along streams in or flowing out of the Unaka Mountain range.  Slope gradients most commonly are 0 to 5 percent but range up to 15 percent on the narrow slopes between the low terraces and first bottoms.  These soils are formed in loamy alluvium washed from watersheds dominated by granite, gneiss, graywacke, phyllite, and arkosic sandstone.  Mean annual temperature ranges from about 52 degrees F. to 57 degrees F., and mean annual precipitation ranges from about 45 to 55 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS;  These are the competing Sawnook series and the Chagrin, Codorus, Colvard, Comus, Dillsboro, Hemphill, Lobdell, Rosman and Transylvania series in closely related famlies.  Chagrin, Codorus, Colvard, Comus, Lobdell, Rosman and Transylvania are on the first bottoms and lack argillic horizons.  Dillsboro soils are clayey and on terraces.  Hemphill soils are poorly drained and on terraces.  Saunook soils are on fans, benches, and foot slopes.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow or medium runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly for growing hay, pasture, vegetables, corn, tobacco, horticultural crops, christmas trees, orchards, and small grains.

Distributon and Extent:  In the Unaka Mountain range and along the eastern edge of the Appalachian ridges and valleys province in Tennessee and in the mountainous areas of Georgia, North Carolina, and Virginia.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Montgomery County, Tennessee; 1972.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic features and horizons recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - 0 to 8 inches (Ap Horizon)

Humic Hapludult feature - Moist value of less than 4 in the Ap Horizon (to 8 inches)

Argillic horizon - 8 to 36 inches (Bt horizon)

Additional remarks -   The 1977 revision changes this series from a thermic to a mesic family.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
