LOCATION STILSON                GA+FL

Established Series
TCS-GRB/Rev. JAK
04/2011

STILSON SERIES

MLRA(s): 133A-Souther Coastal Plain
Depth Class: Very deep
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Moderately well drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Moderately deep, common
Index Surface Runoff: Negligible to low
Permeability: Moderate
Landscape: Middle and Upper Coastal Plain
Landform: Marine terrace
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, back slope
Geomorphic Component: Interfluves, side slopes
Parent Material: Sandy over loamy marine deposits
Slope: 0 to 8 percent
Elevation (type location): Unknown
Mean Annual Air Temperature (type location): 66 degrees F.
Mean Annual Precipitation (type location): 48 inches 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, siliceous, subactive, thermic Oxyaquic Paleudults

TYPICAL PEDON: Stilson loamy sand, cultivated. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

   Ap--0 to 9 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) loamy sand; weak fine granular structure; very friable; many fine roots; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary.

   E--9 to 26 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) loamy sand; weak fine granular structure; very friable; many fine roots; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.

   Bt--26 to 35 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) sandy loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; common medium distinct strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) masses of oxidized iron; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

   Btv1--35 to 48 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) sandy clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; few fine pores; few faint clay films on faces of peds; about 5 percent, by volume, nodular plinthite; many medium distinct strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) masses of oxidized iron; common medium distinct light gray (10YR 7/2) iron depletions; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

   Btv2--48 to 61 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) sandy clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; few fine pores; few faint clay films on faces of peds; about 10 percent, by volume, platy plinthite; common medium distinct reddish yellow (7.5YR 7/6) masses of oxidized iron; many medium distinct light gray (10YR 7/2) areas of iron depletions; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

   B't--61 to 77 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) sandy clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots; common fine pores; few distinct clay films on faces of peds; about 2 percent, by volume, nodular plinthite; common medium prominent dark red (2.5YR 3/6) masses of oxidized iron; common medium prominent light gray (10YR 7/1) iron depletions; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   BC--77 to 80 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) sandy clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine pores; few distinct clay films on faces of peds; common medium prominent dark red (2.5YR 3/6) masses of oxidized iron; common medium prominent light gray (10YR 7/1) iron depletions; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION: Screven County, Georgia; approximately 2.4 miles east on Leola Road from Georgia Highway 21 intersection, about 600 feet north of road in cultivated field, and about 10 feet from field border. USGS Quadrangle, Kildare, Ga.-S.C.; lat. 32 degrees 34 minutes 27 seconds N.; long. 81 degrees 27 minutes 10 seconds W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Depth to horizons that have more than 5 percent plinthite: 30 to 50 or more inches
Depth to Bedrock: Greater than 72 inches
Depth to Seasonal High Water Table: 30 to 40 inches, December to April
Fragment content: 0 to 5 percent, by volume, weakly to strongly cemented ironstone nodules throughout some pedons
Soil Reaction: Very strongly acid or strongly acid throughout, except where the surface has been limed

A or Ap horizon:
Color--hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 2 to 4, and chroma of 1 to 3; or it is neutral with value of 2 to 4
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--sand, fine sand, loamy sand, or loamy fine sand

E horizon:
Color--hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 2 to 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--sand, fine sand, loamy sand, or loamy fine sand

Bt horizon:
Color--hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5 through 7, and chroma of 4 through 8; or there is no dominant color and is mixed in shades of red, brown, or yellow
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--fine sandy loam, sandy loam, or sandy clay loam. Silt content is less than 20 percent.
Redoximorphic features (where present)--Masses of oxidized iron in shades of red, brown, or yellow range from none to common. Iron depletions in shades of gray may occur at depths of 5 to 14 inches below the top of the argillic horizon

Btv horizon:
Color--hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5 through 7, and chroma of 4 through 8; or there is no dominant color and is mottled in shades of red, yellow, brown, and gray
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--sandy clay loam
Redoximorphic features (where present)--shades of red, brown, yellow, and gray range from common to many
Plinthite ranges from 5 to 35 percent

Bt horizon (where present):
Color--hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5 through 7, and chroma of 4 through 8; or there is no dominant color and is mottled in shades of red, yellow, brown, and gray
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--clay loam or sandy clay loam
Redoximorphic features (where present)--shades of red, brown, yellow, and gray range from common to many

BC horizon (where present):
Color--hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5 through 7, and chroma of 4 through 8; or there is no dominant color and is mottled in shades of red, yellow, brown, and gray
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--sandy loam or sandy clay loam
Redoximorphic features (where present)--shades of red, brown, yellow, and gray range from common to many

COMPETING SERIES:
In same family--
Pocalla soils--are bisequal
In semiactive family--
Libert soils--CEC to clay ratio that is less than 0.24 in the control-section
Doucette soils--CEC to clay ratio that is greater than 0.24 in the control-section

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landscape: Middle and Upper Coastal Plain
Landform: Marine terrace
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, back slope
Geomorphic Component: Interfluve, side slope
Parent Material: Sandy over loamy marine deposits
Elevation: 100 to 350 feet
Mean Annual Air Temperature: 60 to 71 degrees
Mean Annual Precipitation: 40 to 55 inches
Frost Free Period: 190 to 240 days

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
Albany soils--somewhat poorly drained and are grossarenic
Clarendon soils--more clay in the control section and have surface and subsurface layers less than 20 inches thick
Dothan soils--surface and subsurface layers less than 20 inches thick
Fuquay soils are well drained
Leefield soils--somewhat poorly drained
Lynchburg soils--somewhat poorly drained, do not have horizons that have more than 5 percent plinthite
Ocilla soils--somewhat poorly drained, do not have horizons that have more than 5 percent plinthite
Pelham soils--poorly drained, do not have horizons that have more than 5 percent plinthite
Robertsville soils--somewhat poorly drained, have dense horizons, and have surface and subsurface layers less than 20 inches thick
Tifton soils--surface and subsurface layers less than 20 inches thick

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:
Drainage class (Agricultural): Moderately well drained
Index Surface Runoff: Negligible to low
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Moderately deep, common
Permeability: Moderate

USE AND VEGETATION:
Major Uses: cropland, some pasture, hayland, and woodland
Dominant Vegetation: Where cultivated--corn, soybeans, cotton. Where wooded--longleaf pine, slash pine, loblolly pine, oaks, sweetgum, and an understory of inkberry, gallberry, southern wax myrtle, and wiregrass..

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Distribution: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, and South Carolina
Extent: moderate

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Bryan and Chatham Counties, Georgia, 1969.

REMARKS: The type location has been moved to Screven County, Georgia. Previous type location in Bulloch County, Georgia was destroyed by excavation for a borrow pit (09/2004). Stilson soils classify by the 10th Edition of the "Keys to Soil Taxonomy" as Oxyaquic Paleudults. A proposal is being drafted to reorder the Oxyaquic subgroup to a position in the Key after Arenic Plinthic (similar to the Kandiudults great group). (10/2007).  The change in Taxonomy did not occur.  The classification was changed back to Oxyaquic Paleudults (04/11) DTA.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
Arenic feature--the sandy zone from the surface of the soil to 26 inches (A and E horizons).
Argillic horizon--the zone from 26 to 80 inches (Bt, Btv1, Btv2, B't, and BC horizons).
Ochric epipedon--the zone from the surface of the soil to 26 inches (A and E horizons).
Oxyaquic feature--the zone from 35 to 80 inches in normal years is saturated for 20 consecutive or 30 cumulative days (Btv, Bt, and BC horizons).
Plinthic features--the zone with 5 percent or more plinthite from 35 to 61 inches (Btv1 and Btv2 horizons).

ADDITIONAL DATA: None

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
