LOCATION OCANA                  TN

Established Series
Rev. RPS:CM
04/2001

OCANA SERIES

The Ocana series consist of deep to very deep, well drained soils with moderately rapid permeability.  They formed in gravelly alluvium on flood plains.  Slope ranges from 0 to 3 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, thermic Dystric Fluventic Eutrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON: Ocana gravelly silt loam--cultivated.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

    Ap--0 to 8 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) gravelly silt loam; weak medium granular structure; friable, common fine and medium roots; 20 percent fragments of chert up to 3 inches in diameter; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (5 to 12 inches thick)

    Bw1--8 to 22 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) gravelly silt loam; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; 25 percent fragments of chert up to 2 inches in diameter; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary.

    Bw2--22 to 36 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) gravelly silt loam; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure, friable; common fine roots; 30 percent fragments of chert up to 2 inches in diameter; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary.

    Bw3--36 to 50 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) gravelly silt loam; few fine faint brown and yellowish brown mottles; weak medium and fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; 30 percent fragments of chert up to 3 inches in diameter; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (Thickness of the Bw horizon ranges from 25 to 55 inches)

    C--50 to 62 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) gravelly loam; common fine and medium faint grayish brown (10YR 4/2) and very dark gray (10YR 3/1) mottles; massive; friable; 30 percent fragments of chert up to 3 inches in diameter; slightly acid.

TYPE LOCATION: Davidson County, Tennessee; at junction of U.S. Highway 70 and Newsome Station Road; 200 feet north of Highway 70.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness ranges from 35 to 60 inches.  Depth to bedrock ranges from 40 to 60 inches or more.  Reaction ranges from medium acid through neutral in each horizon. Content of coarse fragments ranges from 15 and 35 percent except some subhorizons contain up to 60 percent.
Transition horizons have color and texture similar to adjacent horizons.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 to 4.  Where the value and chroma are 3 or less , it is less than 10 inches thick. Texture of the fine earth fraction is silt loam or loam.

The Bw horizon has hue of 10YR and 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 or 4 or value of 3 and chroma of 4.  Most pedons have mottles in shades of brown in some subhorizons.  Texture of the fine earth fraction is silt loam, loam, or clay loam.

Some pedons have Ab horizons with hue of 10YR, value of 3, and chroma of 2 or 3.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR and 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 6. Most pedons have mottles in shades of of gray, brown, and yellow.  Texture of the fine earth fraction is silt loam, loam, clay loam, or rarely sandy loam.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Hannahatchee, Pettyjon, and Tuckahoe series in the same family and the Cannon, Ennis, and Sullivan series.  Hannahatchee soils are high in glauconite and have less than 10 percent fragments.  Pettyjon soils have less than 5 percent fragments.  Tuckahoe soils have more than 45 percent sand and less than 5 percent fragments.  Cannon soils have mollic epipedons.  Ennis and Sullivan soils have siliceous mineralogy.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Ocana soils are on flood plains. Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent. Ocana soils formed in gravelly alluvium from watersheds dominated by cherty limestone.  Near the type location average annual air temperature is 59 degrees F. and average annual precipitation is about 48 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Arrington and Lynville series on the bottomlands, Armour series on the adjacent footslopes, and Hawthorne, Bodine, Dellrose, and Mimosa series on the uplands. Arrington and Lynville soils have mollic epipedons. Hawthorne soils have more than 35 percent fragments of chert throughout. Armour, Bodine, Dellrose, and Mimosa soils have argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained; slow runoff; moderately rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION: Most of the acreage has been cleared and is used mostly for pasture and hay. A few areas are in corn, soybeans, and tobacco. The native vegetation was mixed hardwoods.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: The outer part of the Nashville Basin in Tennessee.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Davidson County, Tennessee; 1976.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - from 0 to 8 inches (Ap horizon)
Cambic horizon - from 8 to 50 inches (Bw1, Bw2 and Bw3 horizons)

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
