LOCATION OLLA                   LA+TN

Established Series
Rev. WHB-WLC
04/2003

OLLA SERIES

The Olla series consists of deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils on Coastal Plain uplands.  They formed in loamy Tertiary Age sediments on highly dissected uplands.  Slopes range from 15 to 60 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, active, thermic Typic Hapludults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Olla fine sandy loam - mixed pine and hardwood forest.  (Colors are for moist soil.)

     A--0 to 6 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) fine sandy loam; weak medium granular structure; very friable; many fine and medium and few coarse roots; few fine pores; extremely acid; clear wavy boundary.  (3 to 8 inches thick)

     Bt1--6 to 16 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) sandy clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine and medium and few coarse roots; few fine pores; distinct continuous clay films on faces of peds and in pores; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

     Bt2--16 to 24 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) sandy clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and few medium and coarse roots; few fine pores; common faint clay films on faces of peds and in pores; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

     Bt3--24 to 38 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) fine sandy loam; few medium distinct pale brown (10YR 6/3) and few coarse distinct strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) mottles; weak medium subangular blocky structure; very friable; common fine and few medium and coarse roots; few fine pores; few faint clay films on faces of peds; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bt horizons is 25 to 50 inches.)

     BC--38 to 64 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) fine sandy loam; few fine distinct light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) and common medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) mottles; weak medium subangular blocky structure; very friable; few strong brown iron concentrations occurring in thin discontinuous horizontal lenses; common fine a few medium roots; few fine pores; thin patchy clay films on faces of some peds; extremely acid; clear wavy boundary.  (5 to 30 inches thick)

     C--64 to 74 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) stratified very fine sandy loam, silt loam, and clay; weak medium platy structure; very friable; few fine roots; few fine pores; extremely acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Caldwell Parish, Louisiana; 1.8 miles west on Louisiana Highway 4 from junction on U. S. 165; 150 feet north of center of Louisiana Highway 4; southwest 1/4 northeast 1/4, sec. 25, T. 13 N., R.  3 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from about 30 to more than 70 inches thick.  Reaction ranges from moderately acid to extremely acid in A horizon and from strongly acid to extremely acid in the B, BC and C horizons.  Ironstone fragments range from 0 to 5 percent by volume throughout the solum.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 2 or 3.  It is fine sandy loam or very fine sandy loam.

The Bt horizon has dominant hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 3 to 8.  Mottles with chroma of 3 to 6, if present, range from few to common.  Texture is sandy clay loam, loam, or clay loam.  Some pedons have thin sandy clay subhorizons in the upper part of the Bt horizon.

The BC horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 3 to 6.  Mottles with chroma of 2 to 6 range from few to many.  The BC horizon is fine sandy loam, sandy loam, or loam,  Some pedons have thin strata of clay loam, sandy clay loam, or clay.

The C horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 2 to 4, or has hue of 2.5Y, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 2 to 4.  It is stratified sand, very fine sandy loam, silt loam, fine sandy loam, sandy clay, or clay.  Thin lenses of ironstone range from none to common.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Apison, Cahaba, Cowarts, Durham, Emporia, Euharlee, Granville, Hartsells, Kempsville, Linker, Marvyn, Nauvoo, Pirum, Sipsey, Smithdale, Spadra, Stringtown, Suffolk, and Vaucluse series in the same family and the Bowie, Ruston and Sacul series.  Apison, Hartsells, Linker, and Pirum soils are underlain by hard bedrock.  Cahaba soils have Bt horizons in hue of 5YR or redder.  Cowarts soils have low activity clays in the control section.  Durham and Granville soils have fragments of igneous rocks in the control section.  Emporia, Marvyn, and Suffolk soils do not have mottles in the BC horizons.  Euharlee soils contain more silt and are developing from cherty limestone.  Kempsville and Vaucluse soils have subhorizons that contain 10 to 60 percent brittle bodies.  Nauvoo, Sipsey, and Stringtown soils are underlain by soft sandstone or shale at depths of 60 inches or less.  Spadra and Smithdale soils have Bt horizons with hue of 5YR or redder.  Bowie soils have more than 5 percent in subhorizons of the lower argillic horizon.  Ruston soils have thicker sola and Bt horizons with hue of 5YR or redder.  Sacul soils have more than 35 percent clay in the upper 20 inches of the argillic horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Olla soils are on narrow ridgetops and side slopes of highly dissected landscapes of the Coastal Plain uplands.  Slopes range from about 15 to 60 percent.  The soil formed in loamy stratified fluvial and marine sediments of Tertiary Age.  Average annual precipitation is about 52 inches, and the mean annual temperature is about 64 degrees F, near the type location.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Ruston and Smithdale series and the Cadeville, Larue, and Savannah soils.  Cadeville soils are at slightly higher elevations and they have a fine particle size-control section.  The Larue soils, on similar landscape positions, have sandy epipedons 20 to 40 inches thick.  Savannah soils have a fragipan and are typically on less sloping areas.  The competing Smithdale soils are on similar landscapes and the competing Ruston soils are on less sloping areas.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; rapid runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  All the acreage is used for woodland production and wildlife habitat.  Principal native vegetation includes loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, southern red oak, white oak, beech, hickory, American holly, flowering dogwood, post oak, sweetgum, and sourwood.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Louisiana and possibly Arkansas.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Caldwell Parish, Louisiana, 1987.

REMARKS:  This soil was formerly included with the Bowie series.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - 0 to 6 inches (A horizon).

Argillic horizon - 6 to 38 inches (Bt horizon).


National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
