LOCATION KAMPVILLE              MO

Established Series
Rev. RLT-FMS
02/97

KAMPVILLE SERIES

The Kampville series consist of very deep, poorly drained, slowly permeable soils formed in acid alluvium.  These soils are on flood plains and have slopes ranging from 0 to 2 percent.  Mean annual temperature is 55 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is 38 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic, mesic Typic Endoaqualfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Kampville silt loam - in a nearly level cultivated field at an elevation of 437 feet.  (Colors are for moist soils unless otherwise stated.)

   Ap--0 to 7 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) dry; weak medium platy structure parting to weak very fine subangular blocky; very friable; many fine roots; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary. (6 to 10 inches thick)

   Eg--7 to 13 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam; weak very fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; few fine prominent yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) masses of iron accumulation throughout; common pale brown (10YR 6/3) silt coats on faces of peds; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary. (0 to 8 inches thick)

   Btg1--13 to 24 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam; weak very fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; few patchy clay films on faces of peds; few fine prominent brown (7.5YR 4/4) masses of iron accumulation throughout; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

   Btg2--24 to 31 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam; weak very fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; thin clay flows in root channels and thin discontinuous clay films on faces of peds; few fine prominent brown (7.5YR 4/4) masses of iron accumulation throughout; few fine black (10YR 2/1) iron and manganese concretions and stains; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

   Btg3--31 to 41 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silty clay loam; weak very fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few patchy clay films on faces of peds and thin clay flow in root channels; few fine prominent brown (7.5YR 4/4) masses of iron accumulation throughout; few fine black (10YR 2/1) iron and manganese concretions and stains; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Btg horizon is 26 to 40 inches.)

   Cg--41 to 60 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam; massive; friable; common fine prominent brown (7.5YR 4/4) masses of iron accumulation throughout; common fine black (10YR  2/1) iron and manganese concretions and stains; moderately acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  St. Charles County, Missouri; about 3.5 miles north of St. Peters and about 1/4 mile west of Highway C; 1,100 feet west and 100 feet north of the southeast corner of sec. 12, T. 47 N., R. 3 E.; Kampville quadrangle, latitude 38 degrees 50 minutes 23 seconds N and longitude 90 degrees 37 minutes 15 seconds W..

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The solum typically ranges from 30 to more than 60 inches thick.  The particle size control section averages from 35 to 48 percent clay and 5 to 10 percent sand.

The Ap horizon has color value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 or 3. Reaction is typically strongly acid or moderately acid unless limed.

The Eg horizon is weakly expressed and is not present in some pedons.

The Btg horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 1 or 2 with higher chroma masses of iron accumulations.  It is silty clay loam or silty clay.  Reaction is strongly or very strongly acid.

The Cg horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4, 5, or 6 with masses of high chroma iron accumulations .  It is silty clay loam or silty clay.  It is strongly acid to moderately acid.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Concord, Elbert, McGirk, Sexton, and Traer series.  Concord soils have a distinct lithologic discontinuity, have a less acid solum, and have an average annual temperature of less than 54 degrees F.  Elbert soils have bedrock from 40 to 60 inches.  McGirk soils average less than 5 percent sand in the particle size control section.  Sexton soils have a lithologic discontinuity.  Traer soils have an average annual temperature of less than 54 degrees F, and are less acid in the lower part of the B horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Kampville soils are on nearly level flood plains.  The slope is 0 to 2 percent.  These soils formed in acid alluvium from the Mississippi River and its tributaries.  The mean annual temperature varies from 54 to 57 degrees F, and the mean annual precipitation varies from 33 to 43 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Carlow, Chequest, Hurst, and Portage soils.  Carlow and Portage soils contain more clay and are on lower slack water positions or old stream channels. Chequest soils have a mollic epipedon and are on lower areas on the floodplain. Hurst soils have browner upper B horizons and are on terraces along major streams that drain into the Mississippi River.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained.  Runoff is slow.  Permeability is slow.  In undisturbed areas there is an apparent water table with an upper limit of 0 to 1.0 feet at sometime from November to April.  Most areas are subject to occasional flooding.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Almost all areas of Kampville soils are cultivated.   Corn, soybeans, and wheat are the principal crops.  Some areas are flooded in the late fall and winter to provide habitat for wetland wildlife.  Native vegetation is mainly willow, cottonwood, and marsh grasses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Floodplains of the Mississippi River and its tributaries in east central Missouri.  The soils are of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Indianapolis, Indiana

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  St. Charles County, Missouri, 1979.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 13 inches (Ap and Eg horizons);  Albic horizon - the zone from 7 to  13 inches (Eg horizon);  Argillic horizon - the zone from 13 to 41 inches (Btg horizon).  Aquic moisture regime with an apparent water table.

This soil is prime farmland where drained.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
