LOCATION KAYMINE                WV+KY VA

Established Series
JDM, PSA/Rev. MDJ
09/2014

KAYMINE SERIES

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Loamy-skeletal, mixed, active, nonacid, mesic Typic Udorthents 

TYPICAL PEDON:  Kaymine very channery loam, stony, on a 70 percent slope in an area of black locust trees and jewelweed. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise indicated.)

    Oe--0 to 5 cm (0 to 2 inches); partially decomposed leaf litter. 

    A--5 to 13 cm (2 to 5 inches); brown (10YR 4/3) very channery loam; weak fine granular structure; very friable; many fine and medium and few large roots; 50 percent channers and stones (60 percent siltstone, 40 percent sandstone); neutral; gradual wavy boundary. 5 to 51 cm (2 to 20 inches thick) 

    C1--13 to 48 cm (5 to 19 inches); brown (10YR 4/3) very channery loam; massive; friable; common fine and medium roots; common yellow, brown, and gray lithochromic mottles; 50 percent channers and stones (60 percent siltstone, 40 percent sandstone); neutral; gradual wavy boundary. 

    C2--48 to 170 cm (19 to 67 inches); dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) extremely channery loam; massive; friable; few fine and medium roots to 24 inches; common yellow, brown, and gray lithochromic mottles; 70 percent channers and stones (60 percent siltstone, 40 percent sandstone); neutral; gradual wavy boundary. Combined thickness of the C horizon is 152 cm (60 inches) or more. 

TYPE LOCATION:
County:  Wyoming 
State:  West Virginia
USGS Quadrangle:  Arnett
Latitude (Decimal Degrees, NAD 83):  37.7699
Longitude (Decimal Degrees, NAD 83):  -81.4538
Directions to the pedon:  1.2 miles by coal haul road northwest of Clear Fork Gap on Guyandotte Mountain and about 1300 feet southwest (210 degrees) of Raleigh County at the boundary of Trap Hill and Marsh Fork Districts on Locust Ridge.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Depth to Bedrock:  Greater than 152 cm (60 inches)
Depth Class: Very Deep  
Rock Fragment content:  15 to 90 percent, by volume, but average 35 percent or more in the particle-size control section. Rock fragments are siltstone, sandstone, shale, and coal.
Soil Reaction: moderately acid to mildly alkaline 
Other Soil Features: Clay content in the fine earth fraction of the particle-size control section ranges from 18 to 27 percent. Most pedons have red, brown, yellow, or gray lithochromic mottles in some or all horizons. 

Range of Individual Horizons:
Oe or Oi horizon (if it occurs):
Thickness 0 to 8 cm (0 to 3 inches) 

A horizon:
Color--hue of 7.5YR through 10YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 0 through 4
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--loam or silt loam
Mottles (if they occur) -- red, brown, yellow, or gray

C horizon (if it occurs):
Color--hue of 5YR through 5Y, value of 2 through 6, and chroma of 1 through 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--loam or silt loam
Mottles (if they occur) -- red, brown, yellow, or gray
Consistence-- friable or firm. 

COMPETING SERIES:
   Fairpoint soils--moderately high hydraulic conductivity, and the particle-size control section includes clay loam and silty clay loam texture

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
MLRA(s): 124 (Western Allegheny Plateau), 125 (Cumberland Plateau and Mountains 
Landscape: hills and mountains 
Landform:  hillslope, ridge and mountain side
Geomorphic Component:  crest, nose slope, side slope, benches 
Hillslope Profile Position: summit, shoulder, back slope, footslope, and toeslope  
Parent Material Origin: siltstone, sandstone, shale, and coal
Parent Material Kind:  formed in regolith from surface coal mine operations
Slope:  0 to 80 percent
Elevation: 200 to 459 meters (656 to 1506 feet)
Frost-free period:  169 to 203 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature:  11.11 to 13.33 degrees C. (52 to 56 degrees F.)
Mean Annual Precipitation:  1016 to 1270 millimeters (40 to 50 inches)

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
  Berks soils-- are moderately deep, has cambic horizon form in residuum on undisturbed uplands
  Bethesda soils-- are in acid families, moderately rapid saturated hydraulic conductivity and clay loam and silty clay loam textures in the particle-size control section
  Buchanan soils-- are deep or very deep and have argillic horizons and are fine-loamy form in colluvium on undisturbed uplands
  Cloverlick soils-- are deep or very deep and have umbric surface layers and are loamy-skeletal form in colluvium on undisturbed uplands
 Cedarcreek soils-- are in acid families
 Fairpoint soils-- are semiactive, moderately high saturated hydraulic conductivity, and the particle-size control section includes clay loam and silty clay loam texture
  Fiveblock soils-- are somewhat excessively drained, semiactive with less 18 percent clay in the particle-size control section and greater than 65% sandstone rock fragment
  Itmann soils-- are in acid families, contain less than 18 percent clay in the particle-size control section and have high to very high saturated hydraulic conductivity.
  Gilpin soils-- are moderately deep, and are fine loamy has agrillic horizon form in residuum on undisturbed uplands
  Guyandotte soils-- have mollic epipedon and have cambic horizon form in residuum on undisturbed uplands
  Handshoe soils-- are deep or very deep and are loamy-skeletal has a cambic horizon formed in colluvium on undisturbed uplands
  Highsplint soil --are deep or very deep and are loamy-skeletal and have a cambic horizon formed in colluvium on undisturbed uplands
  Kimper soils-- are deep or very deep, have umbric surface layers, are fine-loamy, and formed in colluvium on undisturbed uplands
  Lily soils-- are moderately deep, have argillic horizons, are fine loamy and siliceous, and formed in residuum on undisturbed uplands
  Marrowbone soils - are moderately deep over interbedded sandstone and siltstone bedrock and formed in residuum on undisturbed uplands
 Matewan soils-- are moderately deep, loamy skeletal, and formed in residuum on undisturbed uplands
 Pineville soils-- are deep or very deep, have argillic horizons, are fine-loamy, and form in colluvium on undisturbed uplands
  Shelocta soils-- are deep or very deep, have argillic horizons, are fine-loamy, and form in colluvium on undisturbed uplands
  Sewell soils-- are in acid families, contain less than 18 percent clay in the particle-size control section, and have high to very high saturated hydraulic conductivity.

DRAINAGE AND SATURATED HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY:
Drainage Class (Agricultural):  Well drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence:  None
Index Surface Runoff:  Slow to very rapid 
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity Class:  Moderately high to high
Permeability Class (obsolete):  Moderate or moderately rapid. 
Shrink-Swell Class:  Low
Flooding Frequency and Duration:  None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None 

USE AND VEGETATION:
Major Uses: emphasis is on reclamation of surface mined land
Dominant Vegetation: Where cultivated-- Some nearly level to strongly sloping areas used for pasture.  Where wooded-- have established stands of naturally seeded black locust, black birch, yellow-poplar, and sycamore.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Distribution: West Virginia, Kentucky, and Virginia
Extent: Moderate

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  MORGANTOWN, WEST VIRGINIA

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Wyoming County, West Virginia, 1984 

REMARKS: (1) These soils were formerly mapped as strip mines; Udorthents, mudstone and sandstone, high base; Udorthents, sandstone and mudstone, high base. (2) Mineralogy data from West Virginia University indicates that the Kaymine soils have mixed mineralogy. (3) Lithochromic mottles have inherited their colors from rocks. (4) Under the West Virginia University proposed classification, these soils would have been classified Typic Udispolents. (5) The 8/00 revision updates this series to 8th edition Keys to Soil Taxonomy standards. The CEC activity class placement is based on four pedons sampled and analyzed by West Virginia University, which included two semiactive, one active and one superactive pedons. Competing series were also updated. 

Diagnostic horizons and soil characteristics recognized in this pedon are:
Ochric epipedon--the zone from 0 to 13cm (00 to 05 inches) (Ap horizon)
The percentage of any one rock type is less than 65 percent of the total rock fragments in the particle-size control section (12 to 42 inches; C1, C2 horizons).

2014 edit updates.semitab formatting

ADDITIONAL DATA:
Additional data is available from West Virginia University (minimum of four pedons). Mineralogy data from West Virginia University indicates that Kaymine soils have mixed mineralogy. 
Revised: 2/88-JWB,BLW,LDS; 8/2000-DHK 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
