LOCATION KIDAZQENI              AK

Established Series
Rev. MHC/JPM/DLM
12/2022

KIDAZQENI SERIES

Depth class: very deep
Drainage class: moderately well or well drained soils
Parent material: thin mantle of stratified loamy and sandy alluvium overlying sand and gravel alluvium
Landform: flood plains, stream terraces and alluvial fans
Slopes: 0 to 15 percent
Mean annual precipitation: 16 to 35 inches.
Mean annual temperature: 33 to 35 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy-skeletal, mixed Typic Cryofluvents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Kidazqeni very fine sandy loam - on a nearly level slope under balsam poplar at 350 feet elevation.  (All colors are for moist soil)

    Oi--0 to 1 inch; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) slightly decomposed plant material; very strongly acid (pH 5.0).  (1 to 3 inches thick)

    A--1 to 3 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) very fine sandy loam with occasional strata and pockets of dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) fine sand and sand; weak medium granular structure; very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine, fine, and medium and few coarse roots; moderately acid (pH 5.6); clear smooth boundary.  (1 to 4 inches thick)

    AC--3 to 9 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) and dark gray (10YR 4/1) stratified fine sand and silt; very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine, fine and medium roots; moderately acid (pH 5.6) clear smooth boundary.  (0 to 8 inches thick)

    2C1--9 to 27 inches; variegated extremely gravelly coarse sand with occasional lenses and pockets of dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) and dark brown (10YR 3/3) sand; single grain; loose, nonsticky and nonplastic; moderately acid (pH 5.8); gradual smooth boundary.  (15 to 55 inches thick)

    2C2--27 to 60 inches; variegated extremely gravelly coarse sand; single grain; loose, nonsticky and nonplastic; moderately acid (pH 5.8)

TYPE LOCATION:  Susitna Valley Area, Alaska; about 3 miles east of Trapper Creek; the NW 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of section 27, T. 26N, R. 5W., Seward Meridian.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Mean annual soil temperature: 33 to 37 degrees F.
Depth to gravelly outwash material: 2 to 10 inches
Reaction ranges from strongly acid to moderately acid in the solum and from moderately acid to slightly acid in the substratum.

A horizon:
Matrix color: hue of 10YR or 2.5Y; value of 2 or 3; chroma of 1 to 3
Texture: silt loam, very fine sandy loam stratified with lenses of fine sand and sand
Reaction class: very strongly acid or strongly acid

AC horizon: where present:
Matrix color: hue of 10YR to 5Y; value of 2 to 4; chroma of 1 to 4
Reaction class: strongly acid or moderately acid

2C horizons:
Matrix color: variegated
Texture: coarse sand, sand modified by 40 to 70 percent total coarse fragments; 0 to 15 percent well rounded cobble; 40 to 70 percent well rounded gravel
Reaction class: strongly acid or moderately acid

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Chenega, Stratify, Hollow, and Malmesbury series. Chenega soils are well or moderately well drained. Stratify soils have substantial mica content in the profile. Hollow soils are calcareous in the control section. Malmesbury soils have buried O horizons.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Drainage class: moderately well or well drained soils
Parent material: thin mantle of stratified loamy and sandy alluvium overlying sand and gravel alluvium
Landform: flood plains, stream terraces and alluvial fans
Slopes: 0 to 15 percent
Mean annual temperature: 33 to 35 degrees F.
Mean annual precipitation: 16 to 35 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Killey, Niklason, and Moose River soils. Killey and Moose River soils are very poorly or poorly drained soils that occur on floodplains. Niklason soils well or moderately well drained soils that occur on floodplains.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Moderately well or well drained, low to medium runoff. Saturated hydraulic conductivity is high in the stratified surface layers and high to very high in the underlying sand and gravel.

USE AND VEGETATION: Used for woodland and wildlife habitat. The native vegetation includes balsam poplar, paper birch and white spruce.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: MLRA 224 Cook Inlet Lowlands South-central Alaska. The series is of moderate extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: WASILLA, ALASKA

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Matanuska-Susitna Area, Alaska. 1996.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this profile include:
Ochric epipedon: 0 to 8 inches
Sandy-skeletal particle size: 8 to 60 inches
Organic carbon: irregular decrease assumed from stratified morphology
Temperature regime: cryic

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
