LOCATION KINZUA                 NY+PA

Established Series
PSP-WEH-ART
03/2005

KINZUA SERIES

The Kinzua series consists of very deep well drained soils formed in weathered residuum or colluvium from interbedded shale, siltstone, and fine grained sandstone. They are on upland ridgetops and hillsides. Slope ranges from 0 to 60 percent. Mean annual temperature is 44 degrees F., and mean annual precipitation is 37 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, frigid Typic Hapludults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Kinzua channery silt loam, on a 6 percent slope in a wooded area. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

  A--0 to 3 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) channery silt loam, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) dry; moderate medium and fine granular structure; friable; common fine roots; 15 percent rock fragments; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary. (1 to 6 inches thick)

  Bw--3 to 11 inches, yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) channery silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; 25 percent rock fragments; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (0 to 12 inches thick)

  Bt--11 to 34 inches, yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) channery silt loam; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; common fine pores; common faint clay films on faces of peds and on surfaces along pores; 30 percent rock fragments; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (20 to 30 inches thick)

  BC--34 to 42 inches, brown (10YR 5/3) channery silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; firm; 30 percent rock fragments; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (0 to 10 inches thick)

  C--42 to 72 inches, brown (10YR 5/3) channery silt loam; weak thin platy structure; firm; 30 percent channers; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Chautauqua Co., New York, Town of Carroll; one mile south of Wheeler Hill Road, and 20 feet northwest of Gurnsey Hollow Road. USGS Ivory, NY topographic quadrangle; Latitude 42 degrees, 01 minutes, 05 seconds N. and Longitude 79 degrees, 03 minutes, 41 seconds W. NAD 1927.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 34 to 60 inches. Depth to bedrock, typically rippable shale and siltstone, is at depths greater than 60 inches but is commonly within a depth of 100 inches. Rock fragments, dominantly channers and flagstones, range from 5 to 35 percent by volume in the solum, and from 10 to 60 percent in the substratum. Reaction is very strongly or strongly acid throughout the soil.

The Ap or A horizon has a hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 to 4. Texture is silt loam or loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The Bw and/or BE horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 4 through 6, and chroma of 4 to 6. Texture is loam or silt loam in the fine earth fraction. Consistence is friable or very friable.

The Bt horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 5Y, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 3 to 8. Texture of the fine-earth fraction is loam, silt loam or silty clay loam. Some pedons have redoximorphic in the lower part of the B horizon. Structure is subangular or angular blocky. Consistence is friable or firm.

The BC horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 5Y, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 3 to 6. Texture is similar to the C horizon. In some pedons this horizon may have redoximorphic features. Structure is subangular blocky or platy. Consistence ranges from friable to very firm.

The C horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 6. Textures include loam, silt loam, silty clay loam and clay loam in the fine-earth fraction. It has prismatic or platy structure, or the material is massive. Consistence is firm or very firm.

COMPETING SERIES: The Carrollton series are in the same family. Carrollton soils have bedrock at a depth of 20 to 40 inches.

The Edneytown, Gladstone, Millstone, Pigeonroost, Sauratown, Shelocta and Syenite soils are similar soils with  mesic temperature regimes. In addition, Edneytown and Gladstone soils formed in residuum from granitic gneiss, Millstone soils formed in loamy alluvium, Shelocta soils have a solum at depths greater than 40 inches, and Syenite soils developed from loamy residuum from granite. Pigeonroost and Sauratown soils are moderately deep to metamorphic rock. Gilpin, Dekalb, Muskingum, Rayne, and Allegheny series are in related families, but all of these soils have mesic temperature regimes. In addition, Gilpin, Dekalb, and Muskingum all have bedrock at a depth of 20 to 40 inches.  Also in a related family is the Onoville series. Onoville soils have redoximorphic depletions in the upper 10 inches of the Bt horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Kinzua soils are on nearly level to very steep ridgetops, hillsides and valley sides. Slope ranges from 0 to 60 percent. These soils formed in colluvium or residuum weathered from interbedded shale, siltstone and fine-grained sandstone. Mean annual air temperature ranges from 40 to 45 degrees F.; mean annual precipitation is from 30 to 45 inches; and the growing season ranges from 90 to 120 days. These soils are mostly at elevations of 1800 to 2400 feet.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  The Kinzua series is the well drained member of a drainage sequence that includes the moderately well drained Onoville soils. The Shongo, Buchanan, Eldred, Valois, Chautauqua, Schuyler, and Carrollton soils are on associated landscapes. The Shongo, Buchanan, and Eldred soils have redoximorphic features in the subsoil; in addition Buchanan and Shongo have fragipans. Valois, Chautauqua and Schuyler soils formed in glacial till at lower elevations. The competing Carrollton soils are on nearby ridgecrests, which have bedrock at a depth of 20 to 40 inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained. The potential for surface runoff is low to very high. Permeability is moderate in the solum and moderately slow in the substratum.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Cleared areas are used for corn, small grain, hay and pasture. Abandoned idle land is in second growth hardwoods. Native vegetation is mixed hardwoods of red and white oak, sugar maple, beech and white pine.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Unglaciated areas of the Appalachian Plateau in southwestern New York at elevations above 1800 feet. MLRA 127 and 140. The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Chautauqua County, New York, 1988.

REMARKS: Kinzua soils are the frigid analog of the Rayne series. This soil now classifies in the subgroup of Typic Hapludults. Competing series may change as similar soils are reclassified.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
a. Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to 11 inches (A and BE horizons).
b. Argillic horizon - the zone from 11 to 34 inches (Bt horizon).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
