LOCATION ZALDA                  NV

Established Series
Rev. JR/RLB/TM
01/2001

ZALDA SERIES

The Zalda series consists of well drained soils that are shallow to a thin duripan over bedrock. Zalda soils are on low hill summits and crests.  Zalda soils formed in residuum from igneous rocks, with a component of eolian material. Slopes are 2 to 30 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 5 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 63 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, mixed, superactive, thermic, shallow Typic Haplodurids

TYPICAL PEDON:  Zalda gravelly sandy loam, rangeland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)  The soil surface is covered with 40 percent pebbles and 2 percent cobbles.

    A1--0 to 3 inches; pale brown (10YR 6/3) gravelly sandy loam, brown (10YR 5/3) moist; moderate medium platy structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine and fine interstitial and tubular pores; few very fine roots; 15 percent pebbles; moderately alkaline (pH 8.2); gradual wavy boundary.  (2 to 7 inches thick)

    A2--3 to 7 inches; very pale brown (10YR 7/3) loam, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; moderate medium and coarse platy structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few very fine roots; many very fine and fine vesicular, common very fine and fine interstitial pores; violently effervescent; strongly alkaline (pH 8.6); abrupt wavy boundary.  (3 to 8 inches thick)

    Bqkm--7 to 8 inches; extremely hard lime-silica hardpan with an indurated laminar cap 3 to 5 millimeters thick; abrupt wavy boundary. (1 to 8 inches thick)

    R--8 inches; basalt.

TYPE LOCATION:  Nye County, Nevada; 750 feet west, 200 feet north of the projected southeast corner of section 31, T. 13 S., R. 49 E.; 36 degrees, 46 minutes, 21 seconds north latitude and 116 degrees, 29 minutes, 40 seconds west longitude, NAD-1927.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture - Usually dry, moist for short periods of time in the late winter and spring; Typic Aridic moisture regime. The ratio of soil moisture utalized for evapotranspiration between summer and winter is about 0.4:1, typical of the Mojave Desert.

Soil temperature - 62 to 67 degrees F.

Depth to duripan - 7 to 14 inches.

Depth to bedrock - 8 to 15 inches.

Other features - Some pedons contain a thin Bw horizon that is slightly effervescent.


Control section - Clay content:  6 to 18 percent.

Rock fragments:  5 to 25 percent.


A horizons - Value:  6 or 7 dry, 4 through 6 moist.

Chroma:  3 or 4.

Texture of fine earth:  Fine sandy loam or loam.


Bqkm horizon - Continuous laminar cap on unfractured bedrock.

Cementation - Very strongly cemented or indurated.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Alko(NV), Muroc(CA), Nebona(CA), and Stewart(AZ) series.  Alko, Nebona, and Stewart soils lack bedrock under the hardpan.  Muroc soils have a duripan over soft weathered granitic rock, and have sandy loam or coarse sandy loam textures, and contain fine pebbles from decomposed granite.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Zalda soils are on low hill summits and crests. The soils formed in residuum from rhyolitic ash fall tuffs and igneous flow rocks with a component of eolian materials.  Slopes are 2 to 30 percent.   Elevations are 2,500 to 4,200 feet.  The climate is arid with hot, dry summers and cool winters, typical of the Move Desert.  The average annual precipitation is between 3 and 10 inches; the average annual temperature is about 60 to 65 degrees F., and the frost-free season  210 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Akela, Longjim and Shorim soils.  Akela soils lack duripans over the bedrock and are found near rock outcrops.  Longjim and Shorim soils have loamy-skeletal control sections are generally found on steeper positions of the landform.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; moderate to rapid runoff; moderately rapid permeability above the duripan.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Rangeland and wildlife habitat.  The vegetation consists of shadscale, desertholly, white bursage, creosotebush, and wolfberry.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern Nevada.  The soils are not extensive.   MLRA 30.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Davis, California

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Nye County, Nevada, Southwest Part, 1994.  The name is coined.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - The zone from 0 to 7 inches (A1 and A2 horizons)

Duripan - The indurated zone from 7 to 8 inches (Bqkm horizon).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
