LOCATION ZIPPEL                 MN

Established Series
Rev. TAG-CARE-ELB
01/98

ZIPPEL SERIES

The Zippel series consists of very deep, poorly drained soils that formed in silty and loamy calcareous lacustrine sediments on glacial lake plains. These soils have moderately rapid permeability.  Slopes are 0 to 2 percent.  Mean annual temperature is about 38 degrees F.  Mean annual precipitation is about 23 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-silty, mixed, superactive, calcareous, frigid Typic Endoaquolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Zippel very fine sandy loam with a plane slope of less than 1 percent on a glacial lake plain in a cultivated field.  (All colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

   Ap--0 to 7 inches;  black (10YR 2/1) very fine sandy loam, very dark gray (10YR 3/1) dry; weak very fine granular structure; very friable; slight effervescence; slightly alkaline; abrupt smooth boundary.  (7 to 10 inches thick)

   Bg--7 to 12 inches; dark brownish gray (2.5Y 4/2) very fine sandy loam; few fine distinct dark gray (10YR 4/1) and common fine prominent yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) mottles; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; slight effervescence; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (3 to 8 inches thick)

   Cg1--12 to 25 inches; light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) very fine sandy loam; common medium prominent yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) mottles; weak fine subangular blocky structure; very friable; strong effervescence; slightly alkaline; clear wavy boundary.

   Cg2--25 to 27 inches; light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) silt loam; common medium prominent yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) mottles; weak fine subangular blocky structure; very friable; strong effervescence; slightly alkaline; clear wavy boundary.

   Cg3--27 to 60 inches; light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) loam; common medium prominent yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) mottles; weak fine subangular blocky structure; very friable; strong effervescence; slightly alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Lake of the Woods County, Minnesota; about 6 miles north and 1 mile west of Williams; 2300 feet north and 400 feet west of the southeast corner of sec. 11, T. 162 N., R. 34 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The thickness of the solum ranges from 10 to 18 inches.  Thickness of the mollic epipedon ranges from 7 to 10 inches.   The A horizon in some pedons is slightly thinner, but the upper 7 inches after mixing qualifies as a mollic epipedon.  These soils typically contain free carbonates throughout, but some pedons do not have free carbonates in the upper 5 to 10 inches.  These soils have less than 3 percent rock fragments.

The Ap horizon has value of 2 or 3 and chroma of 1 or 2.  It is very fine sandy loam, silt loam, or loamy very fine sand. It is neutral or slightly alkaline.

The Bg horizon has value of 3 to 5 and chroma of 1 or 2.  It is very fine sand, very fine sandy loam, loamy very fine sand, loam, or silt loam.  It is slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline.

The Cg horizon has hue of 2.5Y or 5Y, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 1 or 2.  The Cg horizon has the same range of textures as the Bg horizon and is stratified in some pedons with these textures.  It is slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Glawe Series.  The Glawe soils do not have Bg horizons and are in areas of higher precipitation.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Zippel soils are on glacial lake plains.  Slopes are linear to slightly concave and range from 0 to 2 percent.  They formed in calcareous silty and loamy lacustrine sediments of the Late Wisconsinan glaciation.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 36 to 43 degrees F.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from 20 to 26 inches.  The frost free period is 100 to 140 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  Baudette and Wabanica soils are the main associated soils.  Baudette soils are in higher positions and are better drained.  Wabanica soils are in positions similar to Zippel, but have more clay throughout.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained.  Surface runoff is slow.  Permeability is moderately rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most of these soils are cropped to small grain, forages, bluegrass seed, and potatoes.  Native vegetation was tall grass prairie interspersed with aspen.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern Minnesota, primarily the glacial Lake Agassiz plain.  This soil is inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: St. Paul, Minnesota

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Lake of the Woods County, Minnesota, 1989.

REMARKS:  This soil is prime farmland where adequately drained.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:  mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface to 7 inches (Ap horizon); cambic horizon - the zone from 7 to 12 inches (Bg horizon); aquic moisture regime - low chroma with mottles immediately below the mollic epipedon.

Classification only was changed 5/94.  Competing series and other updates will be made later.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Refer to CFC #3745 of University of Minnesota Soil Survey Laboratory for data from typical pedon.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
