LOCATION ZORRA                  TX

Established Series
Rev. CLG:WMR:JWS
11/2007

ZORRA SERIES

 The Zorra series consists of shallow, well drained, moderately
 permeable soils that formed over indurated limestone of Cretaceous
 system.  The soils are on gently undulating to hilly uplands of
 the Edwards Plateau.  They have dark grayish brown stony loam A
 horizons containing about 60 percent by volume of fragments of
 limestone over a petrocalcic horizon that covers the limestone
 bedrock.  Slopes range from less than 1 to 15 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, carbonatic, hyperthermic Lithic Petrocalcic Calciustolls

 TYPICAL PEDON:  Zorra cobbly loam--rangeland.
                 (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

      A1--0 to 8 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) cobbly loam,
 very dark brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate fine granular
 structure; slightly hard, friable; common fine roots; many
 fragments of limestone and caliche increasing in amount with depth
 and comprise 60 percent by volume, about half of which are less
 than 3 inches in diameter; the fragments of limestone are coated
 with calcium carbonate and have pendants on the bottom; few
 fragments of limestone up to 10 inches along the long axis;
 calcareous; moderately alkaline; abrupt wavy boundary.  (4 to 20
 inches thick)

      Ccam--8 to 12 inches; indurate white (10YR 8/2) caliche, that
 has a hardness of about 3 on Moh's scale and is laminar in the
 upper 1/2 inch; abrupt wavy boundary.  (1 to 6 inches thick)

      R & Cca--12 to 15 inches; fractured indurated limestone;
 cracks and crevices are filled and partially sealed with secondary
 calcium carbonate; gradual wavy boundary.  (0 to 12 inches thick)

      R--15 to 20 inches; fractured limestone bedrock; few seams of
 secondary calcium carbonate in upper part.

 TYPE LOCATION:  Val Verde County, Texas; 7.5 miles west on US
 Highway 90 from its junction with US Highway 277 about 5 miles
 north of Del Rio; 0.5 mile north on Diablo East Marina road; 0.3
 mile east on unpaved National Park Service road; 150 feet north in
 rangeland.

 RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness is 4 to 19 inches and
 corresponds to the depth to the petrocalcic horizon.  Depth to
 limestone bedrock is 5 to 20 inches.  Coarse fragments of
 limestone and caliche comprise 35 to 80 percent by volume of the
 soil mass.  About 5 to 50 percent are gravel size, 10 to 35
 percent cobble size, and 1 to 60 percent stone size.  More than 40
 percent of the soil mass less than 20 mm is made up of limestone
 fragments and reprecipitated carbonates.

 The A horizon is brown (7.5YR 5/2, 4/2; 10YR 5/3, 4/3), dark
 grayish brown (10YR 4/2), very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2), very
 dark gray (10YR 3/1), or dark brown (7.5YR 3/2).  Moist values and
 chromas are 2 or 3.  The fine earth fraction is loam, silt loam,
 or clay loam with a clay content of 18 to 32 percent.  Structure
 is weak to moderate, granular to subangular blocky, in fine to
 medium sizes.  Moist consistence is very friable to friable.
 calcium carbonate equivalent is 10 to 30 percent in the fine earth
 fraction.

 The Ccam horizon is strongly cemented to indurated and laminar in
 the upper part with cementation decreasing with depth.

 The R & Ca layer is lacking in some pedons.  The R layer in most
 pedons consists of thick beds of indurated limestone, but some
 pedons are over interbedded limestone containing thin strata of
 chalk and marl.

 Competing Series:  These include the Amistad, Boracho, Ector,
 Jimenez, Kavett, Olmos, Talpa and Tarrant series.  Amistad,
 Boracho, Ector, Kavett, Talpa and Tarrant soils have mean annual
 soil temperatures less than 72 degrees F.  In addition, Amistad
 soils are over flaggy limestone.  Boracho soils have mixed
 mineralogy.  Ector, Talpa, and Tarrant soils lack petrocalcic
 horizons.  Jimenez and Olmos series lack the indurated limestone
 layer immediately below the petrocalcic horizon; and in addition,
 Jimenez soils have mixed mineralogy and contain many siliceous
 pebbles in the soil mass.

 GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Zorra soils are on gently undulating to hilly
 uplands.  Slopes range from less than 1 to 15 percent.  Rock
 outcrops are common, especially where gradients are over 8
 percent.  Stones generally occupy 1 to 15 percent of the surface.
 The underlying rock is indurated limestone of the Cretaceous
 system, mainly of the Buda and Georgetown formations.  Some areas
 are interbedded with thin strata of marl or chalk.  The  mean
 annual temperature is 70 degrees to 75 degrees F.  Average annual
 precipitation ranges from 15 to 23 inches and the Thornthwaite P-E
 index ranges from 19 to 31.

 GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the competing
 Amistad, Ector, Jimenez, Kavett and Olmos series, as well as the
 Dev, Elindio, Felipe, Lozier and Valverde series.  Dev and Elindio
 soils are over 20 inches deep and occur at lower elevation in
 alluvial sediments.  Lozier soils occur in similar positions and
 lack mollic epipedons and petrocalcic horizons.  Valverde soils
 occur in similar positions and are over 20 inches deep, and lack
 mollic epiedons.  Felipe soils are formed over shaly clay and
 occur on the steeper slopes and breaks at lower or higher
 elevations.

 Drainage and Permeability:  Well drained; medium to rapid runoff;
 moderate perameability.

 USE AND VEGETATION:  Used entirely for rangeland.  Native
 vegetation is short and mid-grasses with some desertic shrubs.
 Grasses are mainly gramas, tridens or threeawns.  Woody plants are
 mainly blackbrush, agarito, condalias, pricklypear, guayacan, and
 guajillo.

 DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Mainly in the southwestern part of the
 Edwards Plateau and probably considerable acreage in Mexico.  The
 series is of moderate extent.

 SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Val Verde County, Texas; 1979.

 REMARKS:  The classification of these soils is tentative; a new
 subgroup, Lithic Petrocolcic Calciustolls will be proposed.  These
 soils were formerly included as part of the Ector series and were
 formerly classified as Lithosols.

           National Cooperative Soil Survey
           U. S. A.




