LOCATION BAINVILLE              MT

Established Series
Rev. CAM/RIM
02/98

BAINVILLE SERIES

The Bainville series comprises calcareous loamy Lithosols developed from soft, weakly consolidated, calcareous loamy shales.  These soils have thin, slightly darkened A1 horizons grading into the calcareous soft loamy weathered parent material.  The Bainville series is associated with the Chama, Cushman, Flasher, Midway, Morton, and Travessilla series.  The Morton, Chama, and Cushman series have much thicker A1 horizons and have evident or distinct B horizons; the first two are Chestnut soils and the last is a Brown soil.  Fisher soils are Regosols formed in deep regoliths, Midway soils are moderately fine textured; and Travessilla soils are shallow over hard sandstone.  The Bainville series is extensive.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, superactive, calcareous, mesic Aridic Ustorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Bainville silt loam.

     A1--0 to 4 inches; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) silt loam, olive brown (2.5Y 4/3) moist; weak coarse platy structure; slightly hard, very friable, weakly calcareous; clear irregular boundary.  2 to 6 inches thick.

     C1--4 to 17 inches; pale olive (5Y 6/3) silt loam, olive (5Y 5/3) moist; very weak coarse blocky, breaking into coarse platy structure in lower part; hard, very friable, strongly calcareous; clear boundary.  4 to 20 inches thick.

     C2--17 to 24 inches; pale yellow (5Y 7/3) silt loam, pale olive (5Y 6/3) moist; abundant soft platy shale or sandstone easily broken down with the fingers; strongly calcareous; clear boundary.

     R--24 inches +; soft fine grained sandstone or loamy shale.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Loam, silt loam, fine sandy loam, and light clay loam types occur.  The A1 horizon ranges in thickness from 2 to 6 inches and generally is free of carbonates where it is more than 3 inches thick.  Colors range as dark as values of 5.5 dry and 3.5 moist in the A1 horizon or in an Ap horizon 6 inches thick.  Weakly consolidated (soft) shale occurs at depths ranging from 4 to 24 inches.  Hard strata may occur at depths greater than 20 inches.  Texture in the upper 20 inches of the profile ranges from fine sandy loam having less than 70 percent sand to clay loam having less than about 30 percent clay.  Colors are for dry soil, except as otherwise stated.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Convex slopes on crests of ridges and hills, and steep plane slopes on sides of hill and valleys.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Excessively drained.  Runoff is rapid.  Permeability is moderate.

VEGETATION:  Mainly short grasses.

USE:  Mainly for range.  Areas of milder slopes are farmed along with larger areas of Cushman, Chama, and Morton soils.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Eastern Montana and western North Dakota and South Dakota.

TYPE LOCATION:  Treasure County, Montana; along county road in NW 1/4 SW 1/4 Sec. 26, T.3N, R.36E.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Denver, Colorado

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Northern Plains of Montana, 1929.

REMARKS:  Characteristics of the Bainville Series, herein described, include characteristics of the Scroggin series, proposed in Fallon County, Montana.  This described range in characteristics of the Bainville Series is much narrower than the range of characteristics that had been included in the series.

OSED scanned by SSQA.  Last revised by state on 9/62.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
