LOCATION BAKERSVILLE            FL

Established Series
Rev. ELR; AGH; GRB
10/2018

BAKERSVILLE SERIES

The Bakersville series consists of very deep, very poorly drained, moderately permeable soils in depressional areas of the flatwoods of peninsular Florida.  They formed in sandy and loamy marine sediments.  Near the type location, the mean annual temperature is about 72 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 56 inches.  Slopes range from 0 to 1 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy, siliceous, hyperthermic Cumulic Humaquepts 

TYPICAL PEDON:  Bakersville muck--in a wooded depressional area.  (Colors are for moist soil.)

     O2--0 to 5 inches; black (10YR 2/1) muck; moderate medium granular structure; slightly sticky; few medium and coarse roots; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (3 to 8 inches thick)

     A1--5 to 20 inches; black (10YR 2/1) loamy fine sand; moderate medium granular structure; slightly sticky; few medium and coarse roots; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

     A2--20 to 41 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) rubbed, loamy fine sand; moderate medium granular structure; slightly sticky; few medium and coarse roots; common coarse lenses and pockets of grayish brown (10YR 5/2) fine sand having less organic matter than the matrix; very strongly acid; clear irregular boundary.  (Combined thickness of the A horizon ranges from 20 to 40 inches).

     Bg1--41 to 52 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) fine sandy loam; weak medium granular structure; slightly sticky; few coarse roots; few thin lenses of grayish brown (10YR 5/2) fine sand between peds having less organic matter than the matrix; very strongly acid, gradual smooth boundary. (3 to 19 inches thick)

     Bg2--52 to 59 inches; dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) fine sandy loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; slightly sticky; few thin lenses of grayish brown (10YR 5/2) loamy fine sand between peds having less organic matter than the matrix; very strongly acid, gradual smooth boundary.  (5 to 17 inches thick)

     Bg3--59 to 63 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/2) loamy fine sand; weak coarse granular, structure; slightly sticky; common coarse pockets gray (10YR 5/1) fine sand having less organic matter than the matrix; very strongly acid, gradual smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bg horizons ranges from 8 to 54 inches)

     Cg--63 to 86 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) loamy fine sand; single grained; loose; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  St. Johns County, Florida; approximately 0.9 mile east of the intersection of Nine Mile Road and Florida Highway 16 and 800 feet south; Land Grant 37, T. 6 S., R. 28 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Soil reaction is very strongly acid or strongly acid throughout.

The Oa horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 1 or 2; or it is neutral with value of 2.  Texture is muck.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 1 or 2; or it is neutral with value of 2.  Texture is sand, fine sand, or loamy fine sand.

The Bg horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 3 to 6, and chroma of 1 or 2; or it is neutral with value of 4 or 5.  Redoximorphic accumulations in shades of brown and yellow range from none to common.  Thin pockets or lenses of finer or coarser textured material are in this horizon in some pedons.  Texture is sandy loam, fine sandy loam, and in some pedons in the lower horizons, loamy sand or loamy fine sand.  

The Cg horizon has hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 4 to 7, chroma of 1 or 2; or it is neutral with value of 4 to 7.  Texture is loamy fine sand, fine sand, or sand.

COMPETING SERIES:  The Sellers series is the only known series in the same family.  Sellers soils are on similar positions, have less fines in the control section, and lack cambic horizons.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Bakersville soils are in wet depressions and on low flats within the flatwoods of Peninsular Florida.  Slopes range from 0 to 1 percent.  They formed in sandy and loamy marine sediments.  The climate is humid subtropical.  The average annual precipitation ranges from is about 56 inches and the average annual temperature is about 72 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Myakka, Tocoi, and Tomoka series.  The very poorly or poorly drained Myakka and Tocoi soils are on similar positions and are Spodosols.  Tomoka soils are on similar positions and are Histosols.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Very poorly drained.  Permeability is rapid in the Oa horizon, moderately rapid in the A horizon, and moderate in the Bg horizon.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are used for wildlife habitat.  A few areas have been drained and used for grazing.  Native vegetation consists of cypress, sweetgum, red maple, white bay, and a few pond pine.  The understory vegetation is mainly waxmyrtle, greenbriar, bracken fern, and cinnamon fern.  Maidencane, switchcane, and various sedges and rushes are in some places.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Central, southern, and northeast Florida.  This series is of small known extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Auburn, Alabama.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  St. Johns County, Florida; 1981.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon:

Umbric epipedon - the zone from 5 to 41 inches. (A1 and A2 horizons).

Bakersville soils are ponded for 6 months or more in most years.  The water table is at a depth of less than 30 inches for most of the remainder of the year.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
