LOCATION BERMUDIAN              PA+MD VA

Established Series
Rev. EJM-EAW, MAV
11/2005

BERMUDIAN SERIES

The Bermudian series consists of very deep, well drained soils.  They formed in recent alluvial deposits derived from upland soil materials weathered from red and brown shale, sandstone, and conglomerate.  They are on floodplains with nearly level slopes of 0 to 3 percent.  Permeability is moderate.  Mean annual precipitation is 42 inches. Mean annual temperature is 53 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, mesic Fluventic Dystrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Bermuda silt loam, on 0 to 3 percent northeast-facing slopes in a cultivated field.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

    Ap--0 to 8 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) silt loam, pinkish gray (5YR 6/2) dry; weak fine granular structure; very friable, nonsticky, slightly plastic; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (6 to 12 inches thick)

    Bw1--8 to 30 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) silt loam, pinkish gray (5YR 6/2) dry; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (15 to 25 inches thick)

    Bw2--30 to 50 inches; reddish brown (2.5YR 4/4) silty clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary (10 to 25 inches thick)

    C--50 to 65 inches; reddish brown (2.5YR 4/4) stratified sand and gravel; single grain; loose, nonsticky, nonplastic; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  York County, Pennsylvania; East Manchester Township, 1 1/2 miles southwest of village of York Haven, along Conewago Creek, 75 feet south of creek. The site is on Legislative Route 66002, 0.2 mile east of Township Route 940, and 0.2 mile west of Township Route 952.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 34 to 52 inches.  Depth to sand or stratified sand and gravel is more than 40 inches.  Depth to bedrock is more than 6 feet.  Rock fragments of sandstone gravel  and occasionally of shale, range from 0 to 10 percent in the A horizon and upper part of the Bw horizon, from 0 to 30 percent in the lower part of the Bw horizon and in the C horizon above 40 inches, and from 5 to 80 percent in the C horizon below 40 inches.  Reaction throughout the soil ranges from very strongly acid through slightly acid.

The Ap or A horizon has hue of 2.5YR through 10YR, value of 3 through 6, and chroma of 2 through 4.  Texture is sandy loam, loam, or silt loam

The Bw horizon has hue of 2.5YR through 7.5YR, value of 3 through 6, and chroma of 3 or 4.  Fine-earth textures are loam, silt loam, silty clay loam, clay loam, and sandy clay loam.

The C horizon has hue of 2.5YR through 10YR, value of 3 through 6, and chroma of 3 or 4.  Fine-earth textures are sand, sandy loam, loam, silt loam, silty clay loam, clay loam, and sandy clay loam.  Textures of sand and sandy loam are restricted to the C horizon below 40 inches. The C horizon below 40 inches may also be stratified with gravel.

COMPETING SERIES:  Clifty and Rowdy soils are in the same family. Clifty and Rowdy soils have hue of 10YR throughout.

Barbour, Basher, Codorus, Comus, Linden, Philo, Pope and Roland soils are in related families.  Barbour, Comus, Linden and Pope soils have less than 18 percent clay in the particle-size  control sections.  Basher, Codorus, Philo and Roland soils have mottled B horizons.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Bermudian soils are nearly level and are on floodplains.  Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent.  The soils formed in recent alluvial deposits derived from upland soil materials weathered from red and brown shale, sandstone, and conglomerate.  Climate is humid and temperate; mean annual precipitation ranges from 40 to 48 inches; mean annual temperature ranges from 47 to 55 degrees F.; and the growing season ranges from 135 to 200 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  The competing Roland soils and the Bowmansville soils are on nearby floodplains.  Abbottstown, Birdsboro, Bucks, Croton, Klinesville, Lamington, Lansdale, Penn, Raritan, Readington, and Reaville are on adjacent uplands.  Bowmansville soils are poorly drained and somewhat poorly drained.  Abbottstown, Croton, Lamington, Raritan and Readington soils have fragipans.  Birdsboro, Bucks, Lansdale, Penn and Reaville soils have argillic horizons.  Klinesville soils have bedrock within 20 inches of the surface.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is slow. Permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Approximately 65 percent of the Bermudian soils are cultivated or in pasture, 25 percent is wooded, mostly mixed hardwoods and 10 percent is in non-agricultural uses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia. The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  York County, Pennsylvania, 1912

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

a.  Ochric epipedon - The zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 8 inches (Ap horizon).

b.  Cambic horizon - The zone from 8 to 50 inches (Bw horizon).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
