LOCATION BOEL                   NE+KS SD

Established Series
Rev. LGR, RRH, WAW, SAS
12/2004

BOEL SERIES

The Boel series consists of very deep, somewhat poorly drained soils on flood plains. They formed in recent loamy and sandy alluvium. These soils have moderate to rapid permeability in the solum and rapid permeability below. Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent. Mean annual precipitation is about 25 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 52 degrees F. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy, mixed, mesic Fluvaquentic Haplustolls 

TYPICAL PEDON: Boel fine sandy loam - (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated. Reaction by .01 M calcium chloride with glass electrode.) 

  A--0 to 8 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) fine sandy loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; weak very fine granular structure; soft; very friable; many fine and medium roots throughout; many fine tubular pores; moderately alkaline; slight effervescence; clear smooth boundary. (7 to 15 inches thick) 

  AC--8 to 11 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) fine sandy loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak fine granular structure; soft, very friable; many fine and medium roots throughout; many fine tubular pores; few thin strata of loam; moderately alkaline; slight effervescence; clear wavy boundary. (3 to 8 inches thick) 

  C--11 to 45 inches; very pale brown (10YR 8/2) fine sand, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) moist; few medium distinct dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) iron masses in the soil matrix; single grain; loose; few fine and medium roots throughout; few fine tubular pores; moderately alkaline; clear wavy boundary. 

  Cg--45 to 80 inches; light gray (2.5Y 7/2) fine sand, light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) moist; few fine prominent dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) iron masses in the soil matrix; single grain; loose; few fine and medium roots throughout; few fine tubular pores; moderately alkaline. 

TYPE LOCATION: Howard County, Nebraska; about 3 miles east and 1/2 mile north of Dannebrog; 200 feet east and 2100 feet north of southwest corner, sec. 4, T. 13 N., R. 10 W.; USGS St. Paul topographic quadrangle; lat. 41 degrees 7 minutes 32 seconds N. and long. 98 degrees 28 minutes 40 seconds W. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 
Thickness of the mollic epipedon: 10 to 20 inches
Free carbonates are typically in the the A horizon and lacking in some of the lower horizons. However, some profiles contain free carbonates throughout, others have none. In the particle size control section, clay content is 0 to 12 percent; sand content is 75 to 100 percent. 
A horizon:
Hue: 10YR 
Value: 3 through 5, 2 or 3 moist
Chroma of 1 or 2
Texture: fine sandy loam, sandy loam, loam, and less commonly, silt loam, very fine sandy loam, loamy sand, or loamy fine sand.
Rock fragments: gravel (2 to 25 mm) ranges from 0 to 14 percent by volume
Reaction: slightly acid to moderately alkaline.
Clay Content: 2 to 25 percent
Sand content: 20 to 90 percent

AC horizon:
Hue: 10YR
Value: 3 through 5, 2 through 4 moist
Chroma: 1 or 2
Texture: fine sandy loam, sandy loam, loamy fine sand, or loamy sand
Rock fragments: gravel (2 to 25 mm) ranges from 0 to 14 percent by volume
Reaction: neutral to moderately alkaline 
Clay Content: 2 to 20 percent
Sand content: 20 to 90 percent

C horizon:
Hue: 10YR and 2.5Y
Value: 6 through 8, 5 through 7 moist
Chroma of 1 to 3
Texture: fine sand, loamy fine sand, sand or coarse sand, typically stratified with lenses of lighter and darker material which may also be coarser or finer textured
Rock fragments: gravel (2 to 75 mm) ranges from 0 to 14 percent by volume
Reaction: neutral to moderately alkaline
Redoximorphic concentrations: common or many, distinct and prominent with hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 8 
Clay Content: 0 to 6 percent
Sand content: 70 to 100 percent

Cg horizon:
Hue: 2.5Y and 10YR
Value: 5 through 8, 4 through 7 moist
Chroma of 1 to 3
Texture: fine sand, loamy fine sand, sand or coarse sand, typically stratified with lenses of lighter and darker material which may also be coarser or finer textured
Rock fragments: gravel (2 to 75 mm) ranges from 0 to 25 percent by volume
Reaction: neutral to moderately alkaline
Redoximorphic concentrations: common or many, distinct and prominent with hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 3 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 8 
Clay Content: 0 to 6 percent
Sand content: 70 to 100 percent

COMPETING SERIES: This is the only series in the family. Similar soils are the Alda, Blackloup, Elsmere, and Platte. Alda soils have a coarse-loamy control section. Elsmere soils are not stratified above a depth of 50 inches. Blackloup soils have a seasonal zone of saturation starting at the surface (poorly drained and very poorly drained). Platte soils have gravelly sand or gravelly coarse sand between a depth of 10 and 20 inches. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landform: level or nearly level flood plains along streams.
Slopes: 0 to 3 percent
Parent materials: recent loamy and sandy alluvium
Mean annual precipitation: 20 to 30 inches
Mean annual temperature: 48 to 53 degrees F. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:These are the Alda, Barney, Blackloup, Cass, Gibbon, Inavale, Inglewood, Platte, and Wann soils.
Alda: are at the same elevation on the flood plain, have a coarse-loamy particle size control section, and have coarse sand or gravelly sand at a depth of 20 to 40 inches.
Barney: are lower on the floodplain, do not have a mollic epipedon, and have a seasonal zone of saturation starting at the surface (poorly drained and very poorly drained)
Blackloup: are lower on the flood plain and have a seasonal zone of saturation starting at the surface (poorly drained and very poorly drained)
Cass: are higher on the flood plain, have a coarse-loamy particle size control section, and do not have a seasonal zone of saturation above 6 feet (well drained).
Gibbon: are at the same elevation on the flood plain and have a fine-silty conbtrol section and are calcareous throughout
Inavale: are higher on the flood plain, do not have a mollic epipedon, and do not have seasonal zone of saturation above 6 feet (excessively drained) 
Inglewood: are slightly higher on the flood plain, do not have a mollic epipedon, and have seasonal zone of saturation starting at 3.0 feet (moderately well drained)
Platte: are at the same elevation on the flood plain, are stratified above a depth of 10 inches, and have coarse, gravelly sand, or gravelly coarse sand above a depth of 20 inches
Wann: are at the same elevation on the flood plain and have a coarse-loamy particle size control section 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:
Drainage: Somewhat poorly drained
Runoff: very slow
Permeability: rapid
Seasonal zone of saturation: ranges from 1.5 feet to 3.0 feet
Flooding: occasionally and frequently flooded. 

USE AND VEGETATION: Most of the soils with loamy fine sand A horizons are in native grass. Those with finer textured A horizons are cropped to corn, sorghum, alfalfa, and small grains. The dominant native grasses are big bluestem, indiangrass, switchgrass, prairie cordgrass, little bluestem, and sedges. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Central and eastern Nebraska along streams and Kansas and Colorado. The series is of moderate extent. 
MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Denver, Colorado 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Howard County, Nebraska, 1970. 

REMARKS: Formerly mapped in the Sarpy series.
Diagnostic horizons recognize in this pedon are mollic epipedon--the zone from 0 to 11 inches (A and AC horizon).

02/2004 RRH, WAW Updated to semi-tabular format, updated the COMPETING SERIES and GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS, sections. 
Content added to the RIC to accommodate the properties correlated in the Saunders County Nebraska subset.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
