LOCATION BONDRANCH              ID+OR

Established Series
Rev. RAS/TWP
04/2001

BONDRANCH SERIES

Typically, Bondranch soils have thin grayish brown A1 horizons, light brownish gray sandy loam B horizons, moderately calcareous, sandy loam Cca horizons, and basalt bedrock at depth of 16 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, mixed, superactive, frigid Lithic Xeric Haplocambids

TYPICAL PEDON:  Bondranch sandy loam - sagebrush and grass (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

     A1--0 to 3 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) sandy loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak thin platy, parting to very weak very fine granular structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; many very fine and fine roots; many very fine and fine tubular pores; noncalcareous; mildly alkaline (pH 7.6); abrupt smooth boundary.  (1 to 4 inches thick)

     B2--3 to 6 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) sandy loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak thick platy parting to very weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; many very fine and fine roots; many very fine and fine tubular pores; slightly calcareous; mildly alkaline (pH 7.8); clear wavy boundary.  (3 to 6 inches thick)

     B3--6 to 11 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) sandy loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; common very fine and fine roots; many very fine and fine tubular pores; moderately calcareous; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); clear wavy boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

     C1ca--11 to 16 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) sandy loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; common very fine and fine roots; common very fine and fine, few medium tubular pores; 3 percent angular gravel; moderately calcareous; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4); abrupt wavy boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

     IIR--16 inches; Basalt; vesicular; calcium carbonate coating on top and in cracks and pores.

TYPE LOCATION:  Bingham County, Idaho; about 7 miles north and 1 mile east of Blackfoot; 1,540 feet north and 50 feet east of the SW corner of sec. 35, T.1S., R.35E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature ranges from 41 degrees to 47 degrees F., and the mean summer soil temperature at the lithic contact ranges from 59 degrees to 66 degrees F.  The soils are usually dry but are moist in some part between depth of 8 inches and the bedrock for about 60 to 80 days in the spring.  The organic matter content of the upper 15 inches, or to the bedrock if shallower, as a weighted average, is more than 0.7 percent if the weighted average sand/clay ratio for this depth is 6.  The control section is dominantly moderately coarse textured and contains less than 35 percent rock fragments.  Basalt bedrock is at depths of 10 to 20 inches.  The A horizon has value of 5 to 6.5 dry and 3 to 4.5 moist and chroma of 2 or 3.  It is noncalcareous or slightly calcareous.  The B horizon has value of 5.5 to 6.5 dry and 3.5 to 4.5 moist, and chroma of 2 or 3.  It has weak or very weak, subangular blocky structure.  This horizon is slightly or moderately calcareous.  The Cca horizon is slightly lighter or paler than the B.  It is moderately calcareous (less than 15 percent lime) but may be strongly calcareous (more than 15 percent lime) in a few (less than 6) inches immediately above the bedrock.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Arrow Arron (T), Malm, Matheson, Mellenthin, Mike, Mullyou, Nevoyer, Prosser, Slayton, Starbuck, Tenno (t), and Trevino series.  Arrow soils are noncalcareous and neutral in the sola.  Malm and Matheson soils have no bedrock above depth of 20 inches.  Mellenthin soils have more than 35 percent rock fragments in the control section and have a calcic horizon.  Mike soils have a mollic epipedon, a calcic horizon, and a medium textured control section.  Nevoyer, Prosser, Slayton, Starbuck, and Trevino soils have a mean annual soil temperature warmer than 47 degrees F.  Tenno soils are dominantly medium textured.  Arron soils are neutral throughout and overlie volcanic tuff.  Mullyou soils lack a calcic horizon.

SETTING:  The soils are on level to rolling basalt plains at elevations of 4,500 to 6,000 feet.  Slopes range from 0 to 12 percent.  The soils formed in eolian material and residuum over basalt bedrock.  The climate is semiarid and has dry summers.  Mean annual precipitation is 8 to 12 inches, including 2 to 4 feet of snowfall.  Average freeze-free period is 80 to 126 days.

PRINCIPAL ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Malm, Matheson, and Tenno soils and the Polatis, and Pancheri soils.  Pancheri and Polatis soils are medium textured and deeper than 20 inches to bedrock.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well-drained; medium runoff; moderately rapid permeability in the A, B and Cca horizons and very slow or none in the underlying bedrock.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mostly for range.  The principal plants are big sagebrush, three-tip sagebrush, small rabbitbrush, cheatgrass, needle-and-thread grass, and Indian ricegrass.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The series is of minor extent in the basalt plains of the Upper Snake River Valley and tributary valleys in eastern Idaho.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Bingham County, Idaho, 1972.

REMARKS:  The soils were classified formerly as Lithosols.

OSED scanned by SSQA.  Last revised by state on 9/72.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
