LOCATION BRADYVILLE             TN+AL

Established Series
Rev. RPS;DLN
04/2001

BRADYVILLE SERIES

The Bradyville series consists of deep, well drained soils on uplands.  These soils formed in residuum of limestone or in a thin silty mantle and the underlying clayey residuum of limestone.  Slopes range from 0 to 30 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, semiactive, thermic Typic Hapludalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Bradyville silt loam - cultivated.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

    Ap--0 to 6 inches, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) silt loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; medium acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

    Bt1--6 to 12 inches, red (2.5YR 4/6) silty clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few faint clay films; common fine roots; few fine dark brown and black concretions; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.

    Bt2--12 to 20 inches, red (2.5YR 4/6) silty clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; common fine root; common faint clay film; few fine and medium black and dark brown concretion; medium acid; gradual smooth boundary.

   Bt3--20 to 27 inches, red (2.5YR 4/6) clay; few medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) and strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) mottle; strong medium subangular blocky structure; firm; plastic; few fine roots; common distinct clay films; few fine and medium black concretions; few angular fragment of chert up to 2 inches across; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.

    Bt4--27 to 36 inches, yellowish red (5YR 4/6) clay; common fine to coarse yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) and strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; very firm; plastic; common distinct clay films; common fine and medium black concretions; few angular fragments of chert up to 2 inches across; medium acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bt horizon range from 25 to 48 inches)

   BC--36 to 48 inches, yellowish red (5YR 4/6) clay; many medium and coarse prominent light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) and few fine prominent light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) mottles; weak coarse and medium angular blocky structure; very firm and very plastic; few thin slabs of hard limestone; few fine and medium black concretions; medium acid.  (0 to 16 inches thick)

    R--48 inches; limestone rock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Rutherford County, Tennessee; 0.2 mile east of Windrow; 100 feet north of private drive to Windrow homestead.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of solum and depth to limestone bedrock range from 40 to 60 inches.  In some pedons there are angular fragments of chert or rounded pebbles and cobbles on the surface and in the soil.  Fragments range up to about 15 percent of the volume.  The soil is medium acid or strongly acid except that it ranges to mildly alkaline in the subhorizon just above bedrock and the surface layer is less acid where limed.

The A horizon has hue of 5YR, 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 or 4 and chroma of 3 or 4.  It is silt loam except the Ap horizon is silty clay loam in severely eroded areas.

The Bt horizon has hue of 5YR or 2.5YR, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 4 to 8.  Some pedons have a thin BA horizon or the upper few inches of the Bt horizon also has hue of 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 6 or 8.  In some pedons the lower part of the Bt horizon has mottles in shades of brown, yellow or red.  The texture is silty clay or clay except the upper 4 to 15 inches is silty clay loam with 32 to 40 percent clay. Some pedons have a discontinuity in the Bt horizon, but this is not considered series criteria.

The BC horizon or C horizon, where present, has hue of 7.5YR, 5YR or 2.5YR, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 4 to 8.  Most pedons are mottled with shades of brown, red or gray.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Archer, Conasauga, Mimosa, Talbott and Winnsboro series in the same family and the closely related Collegedale, Dewey and Fullerton series.  Archer soils have a sandy loam to sand surface layer and significantly more sand in the upper part of the B horizon.  Conasauga and Mimosa soils have hues of 7.5YR to 2.5Y.  In addition Conasauga has a paralithic contact within 40 inches. Talbott soils have hard bedrock within 40 inches and typically have a higher clay content in the upper part of the B horizon.  Waynesboro soils have hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y and have a paralithic contact at a depth of 40 to 70 inches.  Collegedale, Dewey and Fullerton soils have base saturation of less than 35 percent and have sola greater than 60 inches thick.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Bradyville soils are on nearly level to steep uplands.  Slopes range from 0 to 30 percent.  The uplands including these soils are marked by occasional limestone outcrops, shallow depressions and limestone sinks.  These soils formed in residuum of limestone or in a thin silty mantle and the underlying clayey residuum of limestone.  Annual precipitation is 45 to 52 inches and average annual temperature is about 60 degree F.
f.r the area.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Talbott series and the Capshaw, Lomond and Tupelo series.  The moderately well drained Capshaw soils have hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y and have gray mottles in the Bt horizon.  Lomond soils developed in a thicker silty mantle over limestone residuum.  They have a darker surface layer and a fine-silty control section.  The somewhat poorly drained Tupelo soils are on broad, flat areas and have hue of 10YR to 5Y with gray mottles in the upper part of the B horizon.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium to rapid runoff; moderately slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Corn, cotton, tobacco, small grain, hay, and pasture.  About 5 percent is in woodland consisting chiefly of oaks, hickory, elm, hackberry, and red cedar.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The inner part of the Nashville Basin of Tennessee and the Great Valley of East Tennessee and possibly the Pennyroyal of Kentucky and possibly Georgia.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Rutherford County, Tennessee; 1974.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - from 0 to 6 inches (Ap horizon)

Argillic horizon - from 6 to 36 inches (Bt1-Bt4 horizons)

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
