LOCATION BRIDGET                NE+SD WY

Established Series
Rev. LGR
11/98

BRIDGET SERIES

The Bridget series consists of very deep, well drained soils formed in loamy sediments on foot slopes, stream terraces and alluvial fans.  Permeability is moderate.  Slopes range from 0 to 30 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 15 inches, and mean annual air temperature is about 49 degrees F at the type location.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-silty, mixed, superactive, mesic Torriorthentic Haplustolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Bridget very fine sandy loam with a slope of 2 percent in a cultivated field.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

   Ap--0 to 6 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) very fine sandy loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak fine granular structure; slightly hard, very friable; neutral; abrupt smooth boundary.

   A--6 to 13 inches; brownish gray (10YR 5/2) very fine sandy loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the A horizon is 7 to 14 inches.)

   AC--13 to 18 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) very fine sandy loam, dark brown (10YR 3/3) moist; weak coarse prismatic structure; slightly hard,very friable; slight effervescence; slightly alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.  (0 to 12 inches thick)

   C1--18 to 36 inches; pale brown  (10YR 6/3) very fine sandy loam, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable; strong effervescence; moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.

   C2--36 to 60 inches; very pale brown (10YR 7/3) very fine sandy loam; brown (10YR 5/3) moist; massive; soft, very friable; strong effervescence; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Banner County, Nebraska; about 15 miles east and 9 miles north of Harrisburg; 750 feet south and 400 feet east of the northwest corner, sec. 20, T. 20 N., R. 53 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the mollic epipedon ranges from 7 to 20 inches.  Depth to free carbonates ranges from 0 to 15 inches.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5 and 2 or 3 moist, and chroma of 1 through 3.  It is typically very fine sandy loam with the range including loam, and silt loam.  Reaction is typicallyneutral or slightly alkaline but is moderately alkaline in some pedons.

The AC horizon is transitional in color and texture between the A horizon and the upper part of the C horizon.  The texture is typically very fine sandy loam with the range including loam and silt loam.  Some pedons do not have an AC horizon.  It is slightly or moderately alkaline.  The percent of clay in the control section averages between 5 and 18.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 6 through 8 and 4 through 6 moist, and chroma of 2 through 4.  It is typically very fine sandy loam with the range including loam and silt loam. Fine sandy loam is below a depth of 40 inches in some pedons.  Reaction is slightly or moderately alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other series in this family.  Other similar series are Alice, Bayard, Bridgeport, Busher, Creighton, Oglala, and Tripp.  Alice, Bayard, Busher, and Creighton soils are coarse-loamy.   Bridgeport soils are fine-silty.  Oglala soils have bedrock between a depth of 40 and 60 inches.  Tripp soils have a cambic horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Bridget soils are nearly level to steep and on alluvial fans, foot slopes and stream terraces.  Bridget soils formed in loamy colluvial and alluvial sediments.  Slopes range from 0 to 30 percent.  The range of mean annual air temperature is 45 to 53 degrees F, and the range of mean annual precipitation is 14 to 20 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Alice, Bayard, Duroc, Mitchell, and Tripp soils.  Alice, Bayard and Mitchell soils are on similar landscapes.  Duroc soils are pachic.  Tripp soils are on stream terraces.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is slow to rapid depending on the degree of slope.  Permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most Bridget soils are cropped to winter wheat.  Some areas are irrigated corn, sugar beets, potatoes, dry beans and alfalfa.  The steeper areas are in native grasses used for grazing.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Bridget soils are extensive.  They occur in western Nebraska eastern Wyoming and southwestern South Dakota.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Denver, Colorado

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Dawes County, Nebraska, 1973.

REMARKS:  Bridget soils were previously mapped as Bridgeport soils, which are classified in the fine-silty family. Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:  mollic epipedon - zone from the surface to a depth of 18 inches (Ap, A and AC horizons).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
