LOCATION BROCKET                AR

Established Series
KKH:JHB
10/2003

BROCKET SERIES

 The Brocket series consists of deep, well drained, moderately
 permeable soils that formed in loamy sediments weathered from
 sandstone bedrock.  These soils are on nearly level to moderately
 sloping uplands in the Ozark Highlands.  Slopes range from 1 to 12
 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, active, mesic Typic Paleudults

 TYPICAL PEDON:  Brocket gravelly fine sandy loam on a smooth 5
 percent slope in pasture.
                 (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
 stated.)

      Ap--0 to 6 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) gravelly
 fine sandy loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable;
 common fine roots; common medium pores; about 25 percent gravel by
 volume, 2 to 75 mm in diameter; medium acid; abrupt wavy boundary.
 (0 to 8 inches thick)

      B1--6 to 16 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) fine sandy loam;
 weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine
 roots; common medium pores; about 10 percent gravel by volume, 2
 to 75 mm in diameter; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (8 to
 14 inches thick)

      B21t--16 to 30 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/8) loam; moderate
 medium subangular blocky structure; firm; thin patchy clay films
 on faces of peds; few fine roots; common medium and fine pores;
 few particles of mica; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (10 to
 20 inches thick)

      B22t--30 to 58 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) sandy clay
 loam; common medium distinct red (2.5YR 4/8) and yellowish brown
 (10YR 5/8) mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure;
 firm; sand grains bridged with clay; medium clay films on most
 faces of peds; few fine roots; few medium and fine pores; few
 pockets of uncoated sand grains; common particles of mica; few
 uncoated sand grains; few black stains; very strongly acid; clear
 wavy boundary.  (18 to 30 inches thick)

      B23t--58 to 72 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/8) fine sandy
 loam; common medium prominent yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) and
 brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) mottles; weak medium subangular blocky
 structure; friable; few fine roots; few fine pores; common pockets
 and vertical streaks of uncoated sand grains; many sand grains
 coated and bridged with clay; clay films in voids, root channels,
 and on some faces of peds; common particles of mica; 5 percent by
 volume angular fragments of sandstone less than 3 inches in
 diameter; strongly acid.

 TYPE LOCATION:  Randolph County, Arkansas; 1.6 miles northwest of
 Supply, then 50 feet east of county road in NW1/4NW1/4SW1/4, sec.
 15, T. 21 N., R. 2 E.

 RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 60 to 90
 inches.  Thickness of the loamy sediments containing gravel ranges
 from 10 to 30 inches.  Reaction of the A horizon ranges from very
 strongly acid through slightly acid.  Reaction of the B horizon
 ranges from very strongly acid through medium acid.  The A and B1
 horizons have 5 to 35 percent rounded gravel.

 The A horizon has hue of 10YR, values 4 or 5, and chroma of 2
 through 6.  Textures are gravelly fine sandy loam, gravelly sandy
 loam, gravelly loam, and their non-gravelly phases.  Some pedons
 have thin dark colored A1 and yellowish brown A2 horizons.

 The B1 horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and
 chroma of 4 through 8.  Textures are gravelly fine sandy loam,
 gravelly sandy loam, gravelly loam, and their non-gravelly phases.

 The B2t horizon is centered on the 5YR hue, value of 4 or 5, and
 chroma of 4 through 8.  Subhorizons with hues of 7.5YR and 2.5YR,
 value 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 through 8 are included.  Most pedons
 have few to many brown and yellow mottles.  The B21t horizon has
 from 0 to 15 percent gravel.  B22t and B23t horizons commonly have
 few to many particles of mica.  The B22t and B23t horizons have
 few to many pockets of clean uncoated sand grains and few to
 common vertical streaks of sand grains.  Most pedons have a clay
 decrease at 50 inches below the top of the argillic.  These
 horizons have from 2 to 15 percent by volume angular fragments of
 soft or hard sandstone.  The B21t and B22t horizons are loam,
 sandy clay loam, or clay loam.  The B23t horizon is fine sandy
 loam, sandy loam, or sandy clay loam.

 COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Claiborne, Nolichucky, and
 Trimble series and the similar Agnos, Baxter, Boden, Braddock,
 Christian, Muse, Portia, Sequoia, and Trappist series.  Claiborne
 and Trimble soils lack gravel in the upper solum.  Nolichucky
 soils do not decrease in clay, and lack pockets and streaks of
 uncoated sand grains.  Claiborne soils have 5 to 25 percent
 fragments of chert in each horizon.  Trimble soils have 15 to 35
 percent fragments of chert, sandstone, or siltstone in each
 horizon.  Portia soils lack gravel in the surface layers and
 pockets or streaks of clean uncoated sand grains.  Agnos, Baxter,
 Bode

 , Braddock, Christian, Muse, Sequoia, and Trappist soils have more
 than 35 percent clay in the upper 20 inches of the argillic
 xorizon.  In addition, Boden soils are underlain with sandstone
 bedrock at 40 to 60 inches.

 GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Brocket soils are on nearly level to
 moderately sloping uplands in the Ozark Highlands.  Slopes range
 from 1 to 12 percent.  Mean annual precipitation near the type
 location is about 45 inches and mean annual temperature is about
 54 degrees F.

 GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Boden
 and Portia series and the Captina, Doniphan, Gepp, and Peridge
 series.  Captina and Peridge soils have less than 15 percent fine
 sand and coarser in the upper 20 inches of the argillic horizon.
 Also, Captina soils have a fragipan.  Doniphan and Gepp soils have
 more than 35 percent clay in the upper 20 inches of the argillic
 horizon.  Doniphan soils have fragments of chert throughout.  Gepp
 soils are underlain by limestone bedrock.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Brocket soils are well drained.
 Runoff is medium and permeability is moderate.  Seasonal high
 water table is below 6 feet.

 USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly for pasture and woodland with
 limited use for hay crops.  Native trees are oak, hickory, and
 shortleaf pine.  Tame grasses are mainly tall fescue.

 DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Ozark Highlands in Arkansas and
 Missouri.  Possibly in Kentucky and Tennessee.  The series is of
 moderate extent.

 SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Randolph County, Arkansas; 1976.
 REMARKS:  These soils were formerly classified in the Red-Yellow
 Podzolic great soil group.  They were formerly mapped in the Boden
 and Portia series.

           National Cooperative Soil Survey
           U. S. A.


