LOCATION BURDETT                NY

Established Series
SWA-ERS-PSP
05/2004

BURDETT SERIES

The Burdett series consists of very deep, somewhat poorly drained soils formed in till dominated by shale. The soils formed in silty mantles that overlie till that is strongly influenced by shale. Permeability is moderate in the upper silt mantle material and slow or very slow in the lower subsoil and substratum. Slope ranges from 0 to 25 percent. The mean annual temperature is 48 degrees F. and the mean annual precipitation is 37 inches. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, mesic Aeric Endoaqualfs 

TYPICAL PEDON: Burdett silt loam - cultivated (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.) 

   Ap -- 0 to 9 inches, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silt loam; moderate; fine, granular structure; friable; many fine roots; 5 percent rock fragments; neutral; abrupt, smooth boundary. (6 to 10 inches thick.) 

   BE -- 9 to 18 inches, brown (10YR 5/3) silt loam; very weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) on all faces of peds; common medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) masses of iron accumulation and faint grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) iron depletions within the matrix; 5 percent rock fragments; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary. (4 to 18 inches thick.) 

   E -- 18 to 28 inches, light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) silt loam; weak fine platy structure; friable; few fine roots; many, medium, distinct and prominent light olive brown (2.5Y 5/4 and 5/6) masses of iron accumulation within the matrix; 5 percent rock fragments; neutral; clear, wavy boundary. (0 to 15 inches thick.) 

   2Bt -- 28 to 48 inches, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) channery silty clay loam; moderate medium prisms parting to weak subangular blocky structure; slightly firm; common gray (5Y 5/1) clay films on all faces of peds; many medium distinct olive (5Y 5/4) and prominent light olive brown (2.5Y 5/6) masses of iron accumulation and faint grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) iron depletions within the matrix; 20 percent rock fragments; slightly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary. (12 to 22 inches thick.) 

   2C -- 48 to 72 inches, olive gray (5Y 5/2) channery silty clay loam streaked with olive (5Y 4/3); massive; firm; common prominent light olive brown (2.5Y 5/6) masses of iron accumulation within the matrix; 20 percent rock fragments; moderately alkaline. 

TYPE LOCATION: Genesee County, New York, one-half mile south Texaco Town: USGS Stafford, NY topographic quadrangle; Latitude 42 degrees, 54 minutes, 07 seconds N. and Longitude 78 degrees, 03 minutes, 32 seconds W. NAD 1927. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness ranges from 30 to 50 inches. Depth to bedrock is more than 60 inches. Depth to the lithologic discontinuity ranges from 11 to 28 inches. The soil ranges from strongly acid through slightly alkaline in the solum and slightly acid through moderately alkaline in the substratum. Depth to carbonates ranges from 30 to 72 inches. Rock fragments range from 5 to 30 percent above the lithologic discontinuity and 10 to 35 percent below. 

The Ap horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 2 to 4, and chroma of 2 or 3. Texture of the fine-earth fraction is silt loam or very fine sandy loam. Structure is weak or moderate, medium or fine granular or subangular blocky. 

The BE horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5 or 6, chroma of 3 or 4 with 2 chroma faces of peds. Redoximorphic features of iron accumulations and/or depletions are present. Texture of the fine-earth fraction is very fine sandy loam or silt loam. Structure is weak or moderate, very fine through coarse subangular blocky. 

Some pedons have a Bw horizon similar to the BE horizon except lack 2 chroma faces of peds. 

The E horizon, where present, has hues of 10YR through 5Y, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 2 or 3. Texture of the fine-earth fraction is very fine sandy loam or silt loam. Structure is weak to moderate, platy to weak, coarse subangular blocky. Consistence is very friable to friable. It has common or many, medium or coarse, faint or distinct redoximorphic features. 

Some pedons have a B and E horizon. It has hues of 10YR through 5Y, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 2 or 3 on faces of peds and hues of 7.5YR through 2.5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 through 4 in interiors of peds. It has common or many, medium or coarse and faint or distinct redoximorphic features consisting of both areas of iron depletions and soft iron masses. Texture of the fine-earth fraction is very fine sandy loam or silt loam. Structure is moderate thick platy to weak coarse subangular blocky. Consistence is very friable to firm. 

Some pedons have a 2B/E horizon with properties similar to their respective horizons. 

The 2Bt horizon has hue of 5YR through 5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 through 4. Redoximorphic features are evident. Areas of iron/clay depletions are common as are soft iron masses. Ped coats have chroma of 2 or less. Texture of the fine-earth fraction is clay loam, or silty clay loam with clay content ranging from 28 to 35 percent. Structure is weak or moderate, prismatic or subangular blocky in the upper part and weak or moderate, platy, blocky or prismatic in the lower part. Consistence is firm or very firm. 

Some pedons have a 2BC with properties similar to the 2Bt and 2C. 

The 2C horizon has hue of 5YR through 5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 through 4. Texture of the fine-earth fraction is silt loam, silty clay loam, loam, clay loam, or sandy clay loam. Structure is weak or moderate, thin through thick platy, or it is massive. Consistence is firm or very firm. Redoximorphic features are common and are similar to those in the 2Bt horizon. 

COMPETING SERIES: The Angola, Appleton, Ayrshire, Crawleyville, Darien, Digby, Great Piece (T), Jimtown, Mitiwanga, Mongle, Ovid, Shadeland, Sleeth and Whitaker series are members of the same family. Angola, Mitinwanga and Shadeland soils have bedrock within a depth of 40 inches or less. Ayrshire, Crawleyville, Sleeth, and Whitaker soils have thicker sola. Digby, Great Piece (T), and Jimtown soils are underlain with outwash deposits. Appleton, Darien, and Ovid soils lack a lithologic discontinuity and Darien and Ovid soils have a higher clay content in the subsoil. Mongle soils are subject to flooding and are formed in alluvium. 

The Aubbeenaubbee(IN), Crosier(IN), Grantfork(IL), Haskins(OH), Luther(IA), Pinicon(IA), and Shebeon(MI) are members in related families. Aubbeenaubbee, Crosier, Grantfork, Haskins, and Shebeon soils have dense till. Luther and Pinicon soils have a thicker sola and Pinicon soils lack the shale fragments in the sola. The Atherton, Fremont, Greene, Kendaia and Orpark soils are members of related families. All of these soils lack an argillic horizon. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Burdett soils are nearly level through moderately steep on glaciated uplands. Slope ranges from 0 to 25 percent. The soils formed in silty mantles that overlie till that is strongly influenced by shale. The climate is humid and cool. Mean annual rainfall ranges from 28 to 45 inches; mean annual temperature ranges from 46 to 50 degrees F.; and the mean annual frost-free period ranges from 120 to 180 days. Elevation ranges from 250 to 1700 feet above sea level. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Honeoye, Ilion, Lansing, Mohawk, and Nunda soils. Honeoye, Lansing, and Mohawk soils and their wetter associates formed in till that lacks the distinct lithologic discontinuity. The wetter Ilion and drier Nunda soils are members of a drainage sequence on similar till. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Somewhat poorly drained. The potential for surface runoff ranges from very low to very high. Permeability is moderate in the upper silt mantle material and slow or very slow in the lower subsoil and substratum. 

USE AND VEGETATION: Native vegetation is forest of sugar maple, white ash, red oak and black cherry. Most areas have been cleared. Some are used for growing pasture and crops in support of dairying. Large acreages are in brush, reverting to woodland. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Northern slopes of the glaciated Allegheny Plateau, and the Mohawk Valley, of New York. MLRA 101, 140, and 144A. The soil is moderately extensive. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts. 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Schuyler County, New York, 1939. 

REMARKS: New typical pedon from Genesee County was used. The typical pedon could be arguably classified as Albaqualfs Glossaqualfs. This needs to be considered in the MLRA update process. 

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in the typical pedon are: 
1) Ochric epipedon - from 0 to 9 inches (Ap horizon).
2) Cambic horizon - from 9 to 28 inches (BE and E horizons).
3) Argillic horizon - from 28 to 48 inches (2Bt horizons). 

Characterization data is available for the typical pedon S63NY-22-2. 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
