LOCATION BURKETOWN              VA+PA

Established Series
Rev. DDR, DGF
01/2006

BURKETOWN SERIES

Soils of the Burketown series are very deep and moderately well drained.  They formed in old alluvial material derived from acid sandstone and shale.  These soils are on terraces.  Slopes range from 0 to 15 percent. Mean annual temperature is about 55 degrees F and mean annual precipitation is about 40 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, siliceous, semiactive, mesic Typic Fragiudults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Burketown fine sandy loam-cultivated.
 (Colors are for moist soil.)

    Ap--0 to 11 inches; brown (10YR4/3) fine sandy loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; few fine roots; few fine pores; spots and streaks of light yellowish brown (10YR6/4); moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (8 to 12 inches thick)

    Bw--11 to 16 inches; yellowish brown (10YR5/4) fine sandy
loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; few very fine pores; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (0 to
7 inches thick)

    Bt1--16 to 24 inches; yellowish brown (10YR5/6) fine
sandy loam; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; few fine pores; few distinct clay film; few worm casts; few strongly weathered rounded gravel of sandstone up to 1/4 inch in diameter; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 20 inches thick)

    Bx--24 to 44 inches; variegated strong brown (7.5YR5/6), yellowish red (5YR4/6) light brownish gray (10YR6/2), and pale brown (10YR6/3) fine sandy loam; weak very coarse prismatic structure; firm, brittle; 2 percent strongly weathered rounded gravel of sandstone up to 1/4 inch in diameter; very strongly acid; gradual irregular boundary.  (8 to 24 inches thick)

    2Bt2--44 to 60 inches; yellowish red (5YR4/6) sandy clay loam; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine pores; few distinct clay film; 2 percent rounded gravel of sandstone and shale up to 1/4 inch in diameter; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Rockingham County, Virginia; 40 feet north of
County Road 994 and C&W Railroad intersection.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness ranges from 40 to more
than 60 inches.  Depth to bedrock is more than 6 feet.  Depth to the fragipan ranges from 18 to 36 inches.  Volume of rock fragments, commonly gravel of sandstone and fragments of chert, ranges from
0 to 10 percent throughout the soil.  Unless limed, the soil is
very strongly through moderately acid.

The Ap horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 through 6, and chroma of 3 through 6.  The texture is fine sandy loam or loam.

The BW horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 through 6.  It is sandy loam, fine sandy loam or loam.

The Bt1 horizon above the fragipan has hue of 7.5YR through 2.5Y, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 3 through 6.  The Bt1 horizon is sandy loam, fine sandy loam or loam.  Average content of fine sand and coarser is more then 40 percent.

The Bx horizon has hue of 5YR through 10YR, value of 4 through 6, and chroma of 3 through 8.  Both low and high chroma mottles
are common or many in these horizons.  The Bx horizon is sandy
loam or fine sandy loam.

The 2Bt2 horizon has hue of 2.5YR or 5YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 6 through 8.  The 2Bt2 horizons range from sandy
loam to clay.

COMPETING SERIES: There are no other known series in the same
family.  Related series in other families are the Boonton,
Hibernia, Laidig, Landisburg, Monongahela, and Rockaway.  Boonton, Hibernia, and Rockaway soils have more than 10 percent weatherable minerals in the control section.  Laidig, Landisburg, and
Monongahela soils have more than 18 percent clay in the particle
size control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Burketown soils are nearly level to strongly sloping soils on terraces.  Slopes range from 0 to 15 percent.  The upper part of these soils formed in old alluvium from soils derived largely from acid sandstone and shale.  The lower part formed in alluvium derived from limestone influenced soils or in limestone residuum.  The average annual temperature is less than 57 degrees F with a range from about 50 degrees to 57 degrees F.  Average annual precipitation ranges from 37 to 42 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Frederick, Millrock, Monongahela, and Shenval soils.  Frederick and Shenval soils have over 35 percent clay in the particle size control section and are redder in color.  Millrock soils lack both an argillic horizon and
a fragipan.  Monongehela soils have fine-loamy particle size
control sections.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained; slow to medium runoff; moderately rapid permeability above the fragipan and slow permeability in the fragipan.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most of these soils are used for growing crops and pasture.  A small acreage is in woodland.  Crops include corn, small grains, and mixed hay.  Woodlands are mostly mixed hardwoods such as oak, hickory beech, and maple.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Virginia, possibly West Virginia, and Pennsylvania.  The series is of small extent.  Estimated acreage
is 5,000 acres occurring in Augusta, Page, and Rockingham
Counties, Virginia.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Augusta County, Virginia, 1977.

REMARKS:  CEC class based on similar soils.

The 1/2006 rrevision updates this soil to the 9th Editiion of the Keys to Soil Taxonomy (2003).  The CEC activity class placement is based on similar soils and not laboratory data.  Class placement may be revised in the future when laboratory data are reviewed or become available.

Competing series, pedon descriptions (including horizon nomenclature and/or descriptive terms), and other sections on the OSD were not revised.

Previous revision date: 5/84

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
