LOCATION BURSLEY                LA

Established Series
Rev. WHB:WLC
04/2003

BURSLEY SERIES

The Bursley series consists of deep, poorly drained, slowly
permeable soils that formed in a thin mantel of recent alluvium
over late Pleistocene age, mixed loess, and loamy stream terrace deposits.  These level to nearly level soils are on broad stream terraces.  Slopes is dominantly less than 1 percent but ranges up
to 3 percent.  Water runs off the surface at a slow rate.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, active, thermic Aeric Glossaqualfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Bursley silty clay loam on 0.5 percent slope in a cultivated field.
               (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 4 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) silty clay loam;
weak medium granular structure; friable; common fine roots;
neutral; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick).

     Bw--4 to 18 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay
loam; common medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) mottles;
weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few thin discontinuous clay films on surfaces of peds; few fine roots; strongly acid, clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 14 inches thick)

     2B/E--18 to 32 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) silty clay loam (Bt material); common medium distinct grayish brown mottles (10YR 5/2); moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable;
few fine pores; common thin discontinuous grayish brown clay
films on surfaces of peds; common fine and medium brown and black concretions; ped coatings and tongues of grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam (E material) comprise about 20 percent of the horizon; medium acid; clear wavy boundary.  (8 to 26 inches thick)

     2Btb--32 to 46 inches; mottled yellowish brown (10YR 5/4)
and grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam; common medium
distinct yellowish brown mottles; (10YR 5/4) weak medium
subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine pores; common thin discontinuous grayish brown clay films on surfaces of peds; few
fine and medium black concretions; few thin grayish brown silt
coats on surfaces of peds; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.
(10 to 24 inches thick)

     3Btb--46 to 61 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) silty clay loam;
common medium distinct grayish brown and yellowish brown mottles (10YR 5/4); weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine pores; few thin discontinuous clay films on surfaces of
peds; common fine and medium black concretions; medium acid;
clear smooth boundary.  (9 to 24 inches thick)

     3C--61 to 72 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) loam; common medium distinct grayish brown (10YR 5/2) and yellowish brown mottles
(10YR 5/4); massive; very friable; medium acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Catahoula Parish, Louisiana about 9.0 miles south
of Harrisonburg; 0.6 miles west of Good Road Pentecoastal Church;
75 feet north of gravel road; SE1/4NW1/4 sec. 28, T. 8 N., R. 6
E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 60 to 100 inches.  Depth to the 2B horizon ranges from 12 to 20 inches.
Depth to the 3B horizon ranges from 30 to 60 inches.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 2
to 4.  It is silt loam or silty clay loam.  Mottles, where
present, are in shades of brown.  Reaction ranges from very
strongly acid to medium acid except where limed.

The Bw horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 1
or 2.  It is silt loam or silty clay loam.  Mottles are in shades
of brown.  Reaction ranges from very strongly acid to medium
acid.

The B part of the 2B/E horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5, chroma of 4 to 6.  The E material has value of 4 to 6, chroma of
2 or 3.  The B material is silty clay loam or silt loam and the E material is silt loam.  Mottles are in shades of gray, yellow, or brown.  Peds are coated or partly coated with grayish clay films.  Black or brown concretions range from few to common.  Reaction
ranges from medium acid to very strongly acid.

The 2Btb horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of
2 to 6.  It is silty clay loam or silt loam.  Mottles are in
shades of gray, yellow, or brown.  Black or brown concretions
range from few to common.  Reaction ranges from very strongly
acid to medium acid.

The 3Btb horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 4 or 5 and
chroma of 2 to 6.  Texture is loam, very fine sandy loam, clay loam or silty clay loam.  Some pedons have clay below 60 inches.  Mottles
are in shades of gray, brown, or yellow.  Reaction ranges from
very strongly acid to neutral.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the McCune series in the same family
and the Calhoun, Calloway, Deerford, Dundee, Egypt, Gilbert,
Guyton, and Necessity series in similar families.  McCune and
Egypt soils do not have cambic horizons above 2B/E horizons.
Calhoun and Gilbert soils are gray throughout the solum.
Calloway and Necessity soils have fragipans.  Deerford soils have natric horizons.  Dundee soils do not have tongues of albic
material into the argillic horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Bursley soils are on low level to nearly
level stream terraces of late Pleistocene age.  The soil formed
in a thin mantle of recent alluvium over mixed loess and late Pleistocene age terrace deposits.  Slope gradients are typically
less than 1 percent, but range up to 3 percent.  The climate is
warm and humid.  The mean annual precipitation is about 52 inches
and the mean annual temperature is about 65 degrees F near the
type location.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the competing Deerford, Gilbert, and Necessity series and the Forestdale
series.  Forestdale soils are in depressions and drainageways and have fine textured control sections.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Bursley soils are poorly drained.
Runoff is slow and permeability is very slow.  A perched water
table is at depths of 1.0 foot to 3.0 feet during later winter
and early spring of most years.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are used for cropland or pasture.  The main crops are soybeans, cotton, small grains, and truck
crops.  Wooded areas are in oaks, elm, sweetgum, and locust.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Louisiana, and possibly Arkansas.  The series is moderately extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Catahoula Parish, Louisiana; 1983.

REMARKS:  These soils were formerly included with Egypt series.  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to a depth of 4 inches.  (the Ap horizon)

Cambic horizon - the zone from a depth of 4 inches to a depth of 18 inches; (the Bw horizon)

Argillic horizon - the zone from a depth of 18 inches to a depth of 61 inches, (the 2B/E; 2Btb and 3Btb horizons.)

Albic horizon - the zone from a depth of 18 inches to a depth of 32 inches (the E part of the 2B/E horizon.)

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U. S. A.


