LOCATION GAINESVILLE            FL

Established Series
Rev. BPT:AGH
10/2018

GAINESVILLE SERIES

The Gainesville series consists of well drained, rapidly permeable soils formed in thick beds of sandy marine deposits. They are on nearly level to strongly sloping uplands in the lower Coastal
Plain.  Slopes range from 0 to 15 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Hyperthermic, coated Typic Quartzipsamments

TYPICAL PEDON:  Gainesville loamy sand--forested.  (Colors are for moist soil.)

     A11--0 to 5 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) loamy sand; moderate medium granular structure; friable; numerous fine and medium roots; common fine and medium pores; few fine and
medium weathered phosphatic and iron pebbles; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 6 inches thick)

     A12--5 to 10 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/2) loamy sand; common, medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) splotches; weak medium granular structure; friable; numerous fine and medium roots; many coated sand grains; common fine pores; few fine and medium weathered phosphatic and iron pebbles; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (1 to 6 inches thick)

     C1--10 to 23 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) loamy sand; weak medium granular structure; very friable; common fine and medium roots; many coated sand grains; common root channels filled with brown (7.5YR 4/2) material from above horizon; common fine pores; few fine and medium weathered phosphatic and iron pebbles; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

     C2--23 to 90 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) loamy sand; moderate, medium granular structure; friable; many coated sand grains; few pores and root channels; few fine and medium weathered phosphatic and iron pebbles; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

TYPE LOCATION:  Marion County, Florida; 1/4 mile east of Lake Weir Avenue and 1/4 mile northeast of Bible Baptist Church in Ocala; NW1/4SW1/4, sec. 28, R. 22 E., T. 15 S.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Depth of the soil is 80 inches or more.  Reaction is slightly acid to very strongly acid in all horizons. The silt plus clay content ranges from 10 to 15 percent in the 10-
to 40-inch control section.  Texture is dominantly loamy sand or loamy fine sand but includes fine sand or sand.  Total content of weathered phosphatic and iron pebbles in the soil ranges from 1 to
3 percent by volume.  These range from 4 to 20 mm in size.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 1 or 2; or hue of 7.5YR, value of 4, and chroma of 2 or 4.

The C horizon has hue of 7.5YR, or 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 8; or hue of 5YR, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 6 to 8.

COMPETING SERIES:  These include Lake series in the same family, and Arredondo and Fort Meade series which are closely similar. Lake soils have 5 to 10 percent silt plus clay in the 10- to
40-inch control section.  Arredondo soils have an argillic horizon.  Fort Meade soils have an umbric epipedon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Gainesville soils are on nearly level to strongly sloping Lower Coastal Plain uplands.  Dominant slope gradients are 0 to 8 percent, but range to 15 percent.  The soil formed in thick beds of sandy marine deposits.  Average annual precipitation is about 59 inches and mean annual temperature is about 72 degrees F. near the type location.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the competing Arredondo, Lake, and Fort Meade series and Candler, Kendrick, Millhopper, and Tavares series.  Candler and Tavares soils have
less than 5 percent silt plus clay in the l0- to 40-inch control section.  Kendrick and Millhopper soils have argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained, rapid permeability; slow runoff.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most of the acreage is cleared and used for corn, citrus, peanuts, watermelons, truck crops, and improved pasture grasses.  Natural vegetation consists of magnolia, maple, dogwood, holly, live, water and laurel oaks, and slash, longleaf and loblolly pines.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Peninsular Florida.  The soils are of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Auburn, Alabama

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Gainesville Area, Florida; 1904.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
