LOCATION GOLETA                 CA

Established Series
Rev. GES/GMK/ET
02/2003

GOLETA SERIES

The sols of the Goleta series are deep, well-drained soils formed in coarse and medium textured alluvium from sedimentary sources.  They are on alluvial fans and in valleys.  The mean annual precipitation is about 17 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 66 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, superactive, thermic Fluventic Haploxerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Goleta fine sandy loam, irrigated cropland. (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

     Ap1--0 to 5 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) fine sandy loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) when moist; weak, medium, granular structure; hard, friable, sticky and slightly plastic; many very fine roots; ;many very fine interstitial pores; neutral (ph 7.0); abrupt, smooth boundary. (4 to 8 inches thick.)

     Ap2--5 to 13 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) fine sandy loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) when moist; weak, subangular blocky structure; very hard, firm, sticky and slightly plastic; common very fine roots; common fine interstitial pores; neutral (ph 7.2); clear, wavy boundary. (6 to 10 inches thick.)

     C1--13 to 29 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) fine sandy loam mixed with dark grayish brown A horizon from rodent action; dark brown (10YR 4/3) when moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common very fine roots; many very fine and fine interstitial pores; slightly alkaline (ph 7.8); clear, wavy boundary. (10 to 20 inches thick.)

     C2--29 to 40 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) loam, dark brown (10YR 4/3) when moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable, sticky and plastic; common very fine roots; many very fine and fine interstitial pores; slightly effervescent with disseminated lime and fine irregular-shaped lime filaments near bottom of horizon; moderately alkaline (ph 8.1); abrupt, smooth boundary. (20 to 30 inches thick.)

     IIC3--40 to 55 inches; pale brown (10YR 6/3) loamy sand, yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) when moist; massive; soft, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common very fine roots; many very fine interstitial pores; slightly effervescent with disseminated lime; moderately alkaline (ph 8.0); abrupt, smooth boundary.  (0 to 20 inches thick.)

     IIIA1b--55 to 72 inches; dark brown (10YR 5/3) fine sandy loam, dark brown (10YR 3/3) when moist; massive; hard, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few very fine roots; many very fine interstitial and few fine and medium tubular pores; strongly effervescent with disseminated lime and fine irregular segregated lime in filaments or threads; numerous small bits of charcoal throughout; moderately alkaline (ph 8.2).

TYPE LOCATION:  Santa Barbara County, California; about 2,600 feet south of Casitas Pass Road Bridge  over Carpinteria Creek on farm road and 40 feet east in field, approximately 1.75 miles east of Carpinteria.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature is 59 to 62 degrees F., and the soil temperature is usually not below 47 degrees F.  at any time.  Unless irrigated, the soil between depths of about 5 to 15 inches is dry all of the time from later April or May until November or early December and is usually moist in some or all parts the rest of the year.  The 10- to 40-inch control section is stratified and averages less than 18 percent clay.  Gravel is usually less than 15 percent of the soil volume.  The upper part of the profile is neutral to mildly alkaline; the lower part is neutral to moderately alkaline and one-half of the pedons contain small amounts of lime below dept of 36 inches.  Where lime occurs, it is disseminated and in fine threads and filaments and is not a calcic horizon.

The A horizon is grayish brown, dark grayish brown or dark gray in 10YR hue.  It has weak to strong granular or blocky structure where not cultivated and weak to moderate granular or subangular blocky structure when cultivated.  This horizon contains 2 to 4 percent organic matter in the upper part which decreased regularly to less than 1 percent between depths of 10 to 20 inches.

The C horizon is brown, pale brown, grayish brown, or light brownish gray in 10YR hue.  In some profiles there are buried A horizons with colors of dark brown or dark grayish brown.  These buried horizons usually occur at depths greater than 36 inches.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Agueda, Anacapa, Ballard, Botella, Elder, Mocho, Sorrento and Salinas soils.  Agueda soils have a mollic epipedon more than 20 inches thick, are fine-loamy and are calcareous throughout.  Anacapa soils have a calcic horizon and a mollic epipedon more than 20 inches thick.  Ballard and Botella soils have argillic horizons.  Elder soils have a mollic epipedon thicker than 20 inches.  Mocho soils are fine-loamy and are calcareous throughout.  Sorrento soils are fine-loamy and have a calcic horizon.  Salinas soils have a mollic epipedon thicker than 20 inches, are fine-loamy and have a calcic horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Goleta soils are nearly level to moderately sloping and are on alluvial fans and valleys at elevations of 25 to 500 feet.  They formed in coarse and medium textured alluvium from sedimentary sources.  The climate is dry subhumid mesothermal with moderately warm to cool dry but foggy summers and cool moist winters.  The average annual precipitation is 15 to 20 inches.  The mean January temperature is about 65 to 67 degrees F., and the mean annual temperature is about 59 to 62 degrees F.  the frost-free season is about 300 to 330 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Agueda, Anacapa, Ballard and Botella soils and the Arnold, Ayar, Camarillo, Cortina, Milpitas, Positas, and Zaca soils. Arnold soils are sandy upland soils, Ayar and Zaca soils are fine textured upland soils with a paralithic contact. Camarillo soils are mottled and poorly drained.  Cortina soils have more than 35 percent coarse fragments between depths of 10 and 40 inches.  Milpitas and Positas soils have strong argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mostly for growing irrigated lemons, avocados, walnuts, field, truck crops, and for urban purposes.  Uncultivated areas are mostly annual grasses and forbs with oak and sycamore trees.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Valleys in the south coastal part of Santa Barbara County, California.  These soils are moderately extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Davis, California

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Santa Barbara County, California, South Coastal Part, 1974.

REMARKS:  Goleta soils were formerly mapped in the Sorrento series.  They lack a calcic horizon and are slightly coarser textured throughout.

The activity class was added to the classification in February of 2003. Competing series were not checked at that time. - ET

OSED scanned by SSQA.  Last revised by state on 9/74.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
