LOCATION GUALALA                CA

Established Series
RAG
05/2006

GUALALA SERIES

The Gualala soils are Lithosols developed on partially decomposed shale rock near the coast of northern California.  The soils are shallow but essentially nonstony and have a characteristic brush cover.  Climate is humid microthermal with cool, nearly rainless but foggy summers and cool, wet winters.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from about 35 inches to about 50 inches, and mean temperature is about 51 degrees F.  Growing season averages about 240 days, but during this period the highest daily temperature is normally less than 65 degrees F.

This series is associated with the Noyo, Caspar and Mendocino series.  Both the Noyo and Caspar are podzolized soils, in contract to the nonpodzolized and very weakly developed Gualala soils, and both are developed from soft sandstone or sandy coastal plain material.  The Mendocino soils are distinctly deeper and characteristically timber-covered.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, mixed, active, isomesic Lithic Dystrustepts

SOIL PROFILE (Gualala loam):

     1--0 to 5 inches; Brown, friable, strongly acid loam of weak granular structure.  Dark brown when moist.  Contains small fragments of shale.  Some roots present.  Gradual change to:  3-10 inches.

     2--5 to 1 inches; Shattered partially decomposed pale-brown shale rock containing a little soil material in cracks.  Several feet.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Rather uniform in depth over considerable distance.  In some places surface color has a reddish cast.  Normally a very thin layer of litter mixed with small shale fragments occurs on the immediate surface but this may be lacking in places.  Surface texture ranges from loam to clay loam.

TOPOGRAPHY:  Hilly; rather smooth slopes.  Slope not broken by rock outcrops.

DRAINAGE:  Moderate to excessive runoff; rapid permeability; not affected by high water table.

VEGETATION:  Brush; mainly Eastwood manzanita, chaparral-pea, glossleaf manzanita (fire manzanita), and a few Bishop pine and stunted redwoods.

USE:  Not suited for commercial crops or timber production.  None of this soil s cultivated, and its best use is for watershed.

DISTRIBUTION:  Uplands a short distance inland from the coast of northern California.

TYPE LOCATION:  About 5 miles northeast of Anchor Bay, Mendocino County, California.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Davis, California

SERIES PROPOSED:  Mendocino County, California, 1948, State cooperative vegetation survey (U.S. Forest Service).

OSED scanned by SSQA.  Last revised by state on 11/4/48.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
