LOCATION IRONBRIDGE             OK

Established Series
Rev. JEH-RB
09/2003

IRONBRIDGE SERIES

The Ironbridge Series consists of deep, well drained soils formed in sodic reclaim materials from coal strip mines.  These nearly level to gently sloping soils are on strip mines in the Arkansas Ridges and Valley land resource area.  Slopes range from 1 to 5 percent.  The mean annual soil temperature is about 56 degrees F. and mean annual precipitation is about 43 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, active, nonacid, thermic Alfic Udarents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Ironbridge very fine sandy loam, 3 percent slopes, pasture land. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

    Ad--0 to 6 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) very fine sandy loam; massive and platy structure; hard, friable; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 9 inches thick)

    Cd1--6 to 22 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/6) gravelly clay loam, massive structure; extremely hard, very firm; 20 percent sandstone fragments less than 76mm in diameter; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (16 to 35 inches thick)

    Cd2--22 to 53 inches; dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) and strong brown (10YR 5/6) gravelly clay loam and silty clay loam; massive structure; few medium distinct reddish brown mottles; 15 percent sandstone fragments less than 76mm in diameter; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (0 to 31 inches thick)

    Cr--53 to 65 inches; dark gray (2.5Y 4/0) shale; churned and hard.

TYPE LOCATION:  Haskell County, Oklahoma; 800 feet west and 1500 feet south of the northeast corner of Sec. 5, T.9N., R.21E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTIC:  Solum thickness and depth to unconsolidated bedrock ranges from 40 to 60 inches.  The exchangeable sodium percentage throughout the profile is greater than 15.  Fragments of sandstone and shale less than 76mm in diameter range from 0 to 35 percent throughout the profile.

The Ad horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 to 5 and chroma of 3.  Texture is very fine sandy loam or silt loam.  Reaction ranges from medium acid to mildly alkaline.

The Cd horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 4, 5 or 6 and chroma of 2, 4 or 6.  Texture is clay loam or silty clay loam.  Some pedons have thin stratas of loam and silt loam.  It is mottled in shades of red, brown, and gray.  Reaction ranges from medium acid to moderately alkaline.

The Cr horizon has hue of 2.5Y, value of 4, and chroma of 0.  It is shale.

COMPETING SERIES:  These include the tentative Coalgate and Latimer series in the same family.  Soils in similar families include the tentative Whitefield, Emachaya and Lequire soils.  Coalgate and Latimer soils are greater than 60 inches deep over shale material.  Whitefield, Emachaya and Lequire soils do not have natric horizons.  In addition, Whitefield and Lequire soils are less than 40 inches deep over shale material.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Ironbridge soils are on nearly level to gently sloping areas of strip mines in the Arkansas Ridges and Valley land resource area.  These soils are formed from the premine soils of the Counts and Wing series.  The average annual temperature ranges from 54 to 57 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation ranges from 42 to 45 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the competing tentative series Coalgate and Latimer soils, and the similar tentative series Emachaya, Whitefield and Lequire soils.  Coalgate soils are on similar positions as the Ironbridge soils and are greater than 60 inches deep over shale material.  Latimer soils are on floodprone areas and are greater than 60 inches over shale.  Emachaya, Whitefield and Lequire soils are on similar positions but do not have sodic horizons.  In addition, Whitefield and Lequire soils are less than 40 inches deep over shale material

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is slow to moderate.  Permeability is very slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly for pasture land.  Vegetation is bermuda grass, love grass or plains bluestem.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Oklahoma and Arkansas.  The series is not extensive with less than 500 acres.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Haskell County, Oklahoma, 1989.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
