LOCATION PALMAR                 PR

Established Series
Rev. LAD
04/2000

PALMAR SERIES

The Palmar series consists of deep, poorly drained, moderately permeable soils formed in decomposed plant material.  These nearly level soils are on coastal plains and flood plains and are subject to frequent flooding.  Slopes ranges from 0 to 2 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is 54 inches.  Mean annual temperature is 78 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Euic, isohyperthermic Typic Haplosaprists

TYPICAL PEDON:  Palmar muck
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

     Op--0 to 8 inches; black (N 2/0) broken face and rubbed; about 5 percent fibers; less than 5 percent rubbed, moderate fine granular structure, friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; many fine roots; low mineral content; neutral; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 10 inches thick.)

     Oa1--8 to 15 inches; black (N 2/0) broken face and rubbed; about 10 percent fibers; less than 5 percent rubbed; weak medium subangular blocky structure, firm, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; common fine roots; low mineral content; neutral; clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 9 inches thick.)

     Oa2--15 to 23 inches; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) broken face and black (10YR 2/1) rubbed; about 35 percent fiber, 5 percent rubbed; massive; slightly sticky, slightly plastic; low mineral content; neutral, gradual smooth boundary (6 to 12 inches thick.)

     Oa3--23 to 37 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4) broken face and very dark brown rubbed and pressed; about 60 percent fiber; 15 percent fiber rubbed; massive, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; low mineral content; neutral; gradual smooth boundary.  (10 to 16 inches thick.)

     Oa4--37 to 45 inches; black (10YR 2/1) broken face and rubbed color; 35 percent fiber; 5 percent rubbed; slightly sticky and slightly plastic; low mineral content; neutral.

TYPE LOCATION:  Atlantico SCD, Puerto Rico, 2 miles east of curve of dirt road, 2.1 kilometers north of kilometer marker 10.7 of Highway 682.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The reaction of the profile ranges from slightly acid to neutral.

The sapric layers have color in hues of 2.5Y, values of 2 and chromas of 1 or less.  The unrubbed fiber content varies from 5 to 60 percent.  Rubbed fiber content 5 to 15 percent.

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Tiburones series in the same family.  Tiburones soils are more acid in the upper tier.

GEOGRAPHICALLY SETTING:  Palmar soils are on coastal plains and flood plains.  Slope is 0 to 2 percent.  These soils formed in residuum of decomposed plant material.  Elevation is near sea level.  The climate is tropical humid.  The mean annual precipitation ranges from 50 to 58 inches, and the mean annual temperature ranges from 77 to 79 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are Garrochales and Vigia soils and the competing Tiburones soils.  Garrochales soils have a marl layer.  Vigia soils have mineral layers.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained; slow runoff; moderate permeability.  A seasonal high water table is at depths of 0 to 2.5 feet.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are in native vegetation consisting of sedges, ferns, cattails, and other aquatic plants.  Small areas are abandoned sugarcane fields.  These soils are used mainly for pasture.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern coastal plains of Puerto Rico.  These soils are of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Puerto Rico, 1942.

REMARKS:  Formerly Palmas Altas series.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U. S. A.


