LOCATION PASAGSHAK              AK

Established Series
Rev. SR
02/2022

PASAGSHAK SERIES

The Pasagshak series consists of deep, poorly drained soils formed in volcanic ash overlying very gravelly silty alluvium.  Pasagshak soils are on floodplains.  Slopes range from 0 to 7 percent.  Mean annual temperature is about 40 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation is about 60 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, acid Aquandic Cryaquepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Pasagshak silt loam -- under native grass (All colors are for moist soil)

    Oe--1 inch to 0; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) mat of partially decomposed leaves and straw; very strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.   (1 to 4 inches thick)

    C1--0 to 2 inches; light gray (10YR 7/1) silt loam volcanic ash; massive; firm in place, friable when disturbed; few roots; strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (1 to 2 inches thick)

    C2--2 to 4 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) silt loam volcanic ash; massive; few roots; very strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (2 to 5 inches thick)

    2C1--4 to 5 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) loamy fine sand volcanic ash; single grained; loose; mottled with yellowish red; few roots; very strongly to strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (1 to 3 inches thick)

    2C2--5 to 8 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) fine sand volcanic ash; single grain; loose; mottled wih yellowish red; few roots; strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (3 to 4 inches thick)      3Ab--8 to 10 inches; very dark gray (5Y 3/1) silt loam; weak very fine subangular blocky structure; friable; faintly mottled with very dark grayish brown; abundant roots; very strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (1 to 4 inches thick)

    4Cb--10-24 inches; very dark grayish brown (2.5Y 3/2) very gravelly silt loam; nonsticky; few roots; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Northeastern Kodiak Island Area, Alaska.  About 0.1 mile north of gravel pit near head of Anton Larsen Bay.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the recent volcanic ash ranges from 9 to 24 inches.  Texture of the uppermost layers ranges from silt loam to loamy fine sand.  In places, a thin recent deposit of alluvial silt may overlie the ash.  The buried layer of gravel free silty alluvium is commonly about 2 inches thick; it ranges in thickness from less than 1 inch to 4 inches.  Lenses of silty material may occur in the Cb horizon.

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Snowdance(T) series in the same subgroup.  Snowdance soils are not skeletal in the upper part of the control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Pasagshak soils occur on floodplains.  They are formed in alluvium derived from dark colored ashy soils on adjacent uplands.  The climate is cool maritime.  Average annual precipitation ranges from 50 to 70 inches, and the average annual temperature is about 40 degrees F.  Temperatures below freezing are recorded on fewer than 40 days annually, and temperatures above 70 degrees F. are rare.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the Chiniak, Kizhuyak, and Kodiak series.  Chiniak soils consist of gravelly beach material below recent volcanic ash.  Kizhuyak soils consist of thick alluvial accumulations of volcanic ash.  Kodiak soil have, under the recent ash deposit, dark reddish brown A horizons formed in older volcanic ash over till.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained.  Some pedons have altered drainage due to stream incisement.  Permeability is moderate.  Slow runoff.  Some areas are subject ot occasional flooding.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used as grazing land.  The native grasses are cut in places for hay and silage.  The vegetation is tall grass, dominated by bluejoint reedgrass, and associated plants such as fireweed.  In many places the soil supports stands of cottonwood and willows.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern Kodiak Island, Alaska, and adjacent islands.  The series is of moderate extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: WASILLA, ALASKA

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Northeastern Kodiak Island Area, Alaska, 1959.

REMARKS:  The concept of the Pasagshak series is poorly defined, especially in regards to the properties of the underlying material. More data is needed to define the central concept or the series should be inactivated (jpm, 4/87).

Source of the volcanic ash is the 1912 eruption of Mt. Novarupta and Mt.  Katmai on the Alaska Peninsula.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
