LOCATION PERROWVILLE            VA

Tentative Series
Rev. RJH
10/2021

PERROWVILLE SERIES 

MLRA(s): 136-Southern Piedmont
Soil Survey Regional Office (SSRO) Responsible: Raleigh, North Carolina
Depth Class: Moderately deep
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Somewhat excessively drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Very deep
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Low to high
Permeability: Moderate
Shrink-Swell Potential: Low
Landscape: Piedmont upland
Landform: Hill, ridge, interfluve
Geomorphic Component: Crest, interfluve, side slope, nose slope, head slope
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, backslope
Parent Material: Weathered mica schist and biotite gneiss
Slope: 6 to 60 percent
Elevation (type location): 740 feet
Frost Free Period (type location): 210 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature (type location): 57 degrees F.
Mean Annual Precipitation (type location): 44 inches 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, micaceous, mesic Typic Dystrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON: Perrowville fine sandy loam on a 25 to 60 percent slope in woodland. (Colors are for moist soil.)

   Oi--0 to 1 inches; loose leaves, twigs, and partly decomposed organic material.

   A1--1 to 3 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) fine sandy loam; moderate fine granular structure; soft, very friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; many fine and few medium roots; 5 percent quartz gravel; common medium flakes of mica; strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.

   A2--3 to 6 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) fine sandy loam; weak fine granular structure; soft, very friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; many fine and few medium and coarse roots; 10 percent quartz gravel; common medium flakes of mica; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   Bw1--6 to 12 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) fine sandy loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; soft, very friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; many fine and few medium and coarse roots; 10 percent quartz gravel; 2 percent quartz cobbles; many medium flakes of mica; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   Bw2--12 to 18 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) fine sandy loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; soft, very friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; common fine and few medium and coarse roots; 5 percent quartz gravel; 2 percent quartz cobbles; many medium flakes of mica; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   C--18 to 40 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/6) and dark brown (10YR 3/3) saprolite of interbedded mica gneiss and mica schist that crushes to loamy coarse sand; massive; slightly hard, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine and medium roots; 5 percent quartz gravel; many medium flakes of mica; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary.

   Cr--40 to 66 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3), brown (10YR 4/3), and yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) interbedded mica gneiss and mica schist that crushes to loamy coarse sand; massive; hard, firm, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine roots between faces of rock; 5 percent quartz gravel; many medium flakes of mica; moderately acid; abrupt wavy boundary.

   R--66 inches; multicolored, hard mica gneiss bedrock. 

TYPE LOCATION: Bedford County, Virginia; 625 feet south and 275 feet west of the intersection of Virginia Secondary Roads 737 and 732.  Moneta USGS topographic quadrangle; lat. 37 degrees 10 minutes 4.22 seconds N. and long. 79 degrees 31 minutes 5.58 seconds W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 
Solum Thickness: 15 to 30 inches
Depth to Cr: 20 to 40 inches
Depth to R: Greater than 60 inches
Rock Fragment Content: 0 to 15 percent, throughout
Soil Reaction: very strongly acid to moderately acid, throughout 
Mica Content: Common to many flakes in the A horizons and many in the Bw and C horizons. Mica content increases with depth.

RANGE OF INDIVIDUAL HORIZONS:
A horizons:
Color-- hue of 10YR, value of 3 to 5, chroma of 2 to 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or coarse sandy loam

BA horizon (where present):
Color-- hue 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 or 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or loam

Bw horizons:
Color-- hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 or 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- fine sandy loam, sandy loam, loam, or loamy coarse sand

BC horizon (where present):
Color-- hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- fine sandy loam, sandy loam, loam, or loamy coarse sand

C horizon:
Color-- hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 2 to 6, and chroma of 2 to 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- sandy loam, loamy coarse sand, or fine sandy loam

COMPETING SERIES: 
Brownwood soils--are located in adjacent MLRA 130B
Chandler soils--are located in adjacent MLRA 130B
Manor soils--are located in adjacent MLRA 130B
Micaville soils--are located in adjacent MLRA 130B

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: 
Landscape: Piedmont upland
Landform: Hill, ridge, interfluve
Geomorphic Component: crest, Interfluve, side slope, nose slope, head slope
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, backslope
Parent Material: Residuum from felsic metamorphic or igneous rock such as mica schist, gneiss, granite gneiss, mica gneiss, granodiorite, and granite
Slope: 6 to 60 percent
Elevation: 700 to 1200 feet
Frost Free Period: 190 to 230 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature: 54 to 59 degrees
Mean Annual Precipitation: 43 to 51 inches 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: 
Huddleston soils--are very deep and have a fine-loamy particle-size control section
Poplar Forest soils--are very deep and have a fine particle-size control section
Fairview soils--are very deep, have a fine particle-size control section, and low mica content
Toast soils--are very deep and have a fine particle-size control section, and low mica content
Tallapoosa soils--are shallow to Cr and located in the thermic part of MLRA 136

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: 
Depth Class: Very deep
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Somewhat excessively drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Very deep
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Low to high
Permeability: Moderately rapid
Shrink-Swell Potential: Low 

USE AND VEGETATION: 
Major Uses: Cultivated crops, pasture, and woodland
Dominant Vegetation: Where cultivated-- corn, cotton, oats, grain sorghum, tobacco, pasture and hay. Where forested-- white oak, yellow-poplar, southern red oak, chestnut oak, scarlet oak, loblolly pine, black oak, hickory, shortleaf pine, and Virginia pine 

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Distribution: Virginia, and possibly North Carolina
Extent: Small

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Bedford County, Virginia; 1989.

REMARKS: These soils were previously mapped as Sweetapple series. The area where Perrowville is mapped was originally mapped as thermic, and later converted to mesic.  These soils feel as if they are higher in silt content than mechanical analysis shows them to be. They have a greasy feel caused by the high mica content. The mica is dominantly soft and mineral structure is destroyed by prolonged rubbing.  The soil horizon depths were revised on 10/2021 to ensure the description began at the soil surface.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:
Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to a depth of 6 inches (Oi, A1 and A2 horizons) 
Cambic horizon - the zone from 6 to 18 inches (Bw1 and Bw2 horizons) 
High content of flakes of mica in the Bt2, BC, and C horizons
Paralithic contact - contact with weathered bedrock at 40 inches (upper boundary of the Cr horizon)

ADDITIONAL DATA:
Laboratory Data: No laboratory data available.
Database Information:
Typical Pedon Data Mapunit ID82665
User Pedon ID--89VA019025 
________________________________________
National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
