LOCATION PINEGROVE              OH

Established Series
TDG-MMF-DRM
7/88

PINEGROVE SERIES

The Pinegrove series consists of deep, excessively drained,
rapidly permeable soils formed in acid regolith from surface
mine operations.  The regolith is a mixture of partially
weathered sandy fine earth and fragments of bedrock.  Fragments
of rock consist mainly of medium and coarse-grained sandstone
and lesser amounts of fine-grained sandstone, siltstone, shale,
and coal.  Slopes range from 0 to 70 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 40 inches, and mean annual temperature is about 54 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Mixed, mesic Typic Udipsamments

TYPICAL PEDON:  Pinegrove sand-on a 60 percent convex slope.
(Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated)

A - 0 to 8 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) sand, very pale
brown (10YR 7/3) dry; weak coarse granular structure; very
friable; few coarse and many fine and medium roots; 2 percent
shale and 6 percent sandstone fragments; extremely acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (1 to 10 inches thick)

C1 - 8 to 15 inches; variegated yellowish brown (10YR 5/6)
(85 percent) and very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) (15 percent) loamy coarse sand; single grained; loose; few fine and coarse
roots; 12 percent sandstone fragments; extremely acid; clear
wavy boundary.

C2 - 15 to 30 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) channery
loamy coarse sand; single grained; loose; few coarse roots; many
soft sandstone fragments; 10 percent shale and hard sandstone fragments; extremely acid; clear wavy boundary.

C3 - 30 to 43 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) channery
loamy coarse sand; single grained; loose; few coarse roots; 15 percent hard sandstone fragments; extremely acid; clear wavy boundary.

C4 - 43 to 60 inches; variegated yellowish brown (10YR 5/6)
(80 percent) and brown (10YR 4/3) (20 percent) channery loamy
coarse sand; single grained; loose; few fine and coarse roots;
thin strata of channery sandy loam; many soft sandstone
fragments; 12 percent shale fragments; extremely acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Gallia County, Ohio; Cheshire Township; about
2.7 miles southeast of Eno; 525 feet north and 195 feet east of
the southwest corner of sec. 26, T. 5 N., R. 14 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Reaction ranges from strongly acid to extremely acid except for surface layers that have been
reclaimed.  Fragments of medium and coarse-grained sandstone typically have weak coherence and weather rapidly.  They are
less than 35 percent by volume to a depth of 40 inches, but
range up to 60 percent below 40 inches.  They are mostly in the
2 mm. to 25 cm. range but also include stones and boulders.

In unreclaimed areas (or areas reclaimed without addition of
topsoil) the A or Ap horizon is sand, loamy sand, loamy coarse
sand, sandy loam, or coarse sandy loam.  It has hue of 7.5YR,
10YR, or 2.5Y; value of 3 to 6; and chroma of 2 to 6.  Areas reclaimed with addition of a blanket of "topsoil" have an Ap
horizon as much as 10 inches thick of loam, silt loam, or silty
clay loam; and up to 15 percent rock fragments.  It has hue of
2.5YR to 5Y, or is neutral; value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 0 to
8.

Individual layers of the C horizon commonly are loamy sand,
loamy coarse sand, sand, or coarse sand; or channery or gravelly analogues of these textures; but very gravelly or very channery analogues of these textures are in some subhorizons below 40
inches, and thin subhorizons of finer textures are in some
pedons.  Clay content ranges from 2 to 12 percent.  Colors in
the C horizon have hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y; value of 3 to 6; and
chroma of 2 to 8.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Abscota, Caesar, Chute, Dabney, Hodge, Oakville, Penwood, Perks, Plainfield, Sarpy, Suncook,
Tyner, Westport, and Windsor series in the same family, and the Barkcamp, Bethesda, Itmann, and Sewell series.  All of the soils
in the same family except Chute, Oakville, Plainfield, and
Westport formed in fluvial sediments and are stratified.  Chute
and Westport soils formed in aeolian sand deposits and lack
coarse fragments.  Oakville and Plainfield soils formed in sandy sediments or drift and do not have fragments of sandstone from surface mine operations.  Barkcamp, Bethesda, Itmann, and Sewell soils also formed in regolith from surface mine operations but
are loamy-skeletal.  In addition Barkcamp soils are ultra acid (reaction of 3.5 or less); and Bethesda and Itmann soils have textures finer than loamy fine sand in the fine earth fraction
of the control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Pinegrove soils are on nearly level
ridgetops and benches to very steep side slopes.  They formed in
acid regolith from surface mine operations.  Rock fragments are mostly medium and coarse-grained sandstone with lesser amounts
of fine-grained sandstone, siltstone, shale, and coal.  Slopes
range from 0 to 70 percent.  Mean annual precipitation ranges
from about 39 to 43 inches, and mean annual temperature ranges
from about 51 to 56 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing
Barkcamp and Bethesda soils, in similar positions; and the
Gilpin, Lily, Steinsburg, and Upshur soils that formed in
residuum from bedrock on uplands.  Gilpin and Lily soils have fine-loamy argillic horizons, but Steinsburg soils have
coarse-loamy cambic horizons.  Gilpin soils formed in residuum
from interbedded siltstone, shale and sandstone, whereas Lily
and Steinsburg soils formed in residuum from sandstone.   Upshur soils have fine-textured argillic horizons and formed in
residuum mainly from clay shale.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Excessively drained; slow to very
rapid runoff; rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Many areas have sparse vegetation and are
used by wildlife or for recreation.  Some areas have been
reclaimed and have been planted to trees or seeded to grasses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Ohio and possibly Kentucky,
Pennsylvania and West Virginia.  The series is of moderate
extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Gallia County, Ohio; 1988.

REMARKS:  These soils were formerly mapped as mine spoils and
later as inclusions in the Barkcamp series.  Pinegrove soils
have no diagnostic horizons except for an ochric epipedon (A) -
from the surface to a depth of about 8 inches.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Laboratory characterization data and
engineering test data are available for GL-4 (typical pedon) and LW-3.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
