LOCATION POLEBAR                CA

Established Series
Rev. SBJ-RCH
01/2023

POLEBAR SERIES

The Polebar series consists of well drained soils on hilly to very steep uplands on hard sedimentary and metasedimentary rocks. The mean annual precipitation is about 30 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 56 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: fine, vermiculitic, mesic Aquic Argixerolls 

TYPICAL PEDON: Polebar gravelly loam - rangeland (Colors for dry soil unless otherwise stated)

	A1--0 to 8 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) gravelly loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak and moderate, medium and coarse subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, slightly plastic and sticky; many fine roots and pores; slightly acid; abrupt wavy boundary. (4 to 16 inches)

	B2t--8 to 18 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/3) gravelly clay, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) moist; moderate coarse angular blocky structure; very hard, friable, moist, very plastic and very sticky; moderately thick continuous clay films on all ped faces; few pores and few roots; clear wavy boundary. (6 to 11 inches)

	B3t--18 to 21 inches;  mottled dark brown (10YR 3/3) and grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) gravelly clay, dark brown (10YR 3/3) and dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; moderate, medium and coarse subangular blocky structure; very hard; firm; very sticky; few discontinuous clay films; mildly alkaline; gradual wavy boundary. (2 to 6 inches)

	C1--21 to 35 inches; gray (5Y 6/1), gravelly light clay, olive gray (5Y 4/2) moist; moderate, medium and coarse subangular blocky structure; very hard, firm, very sticky; soil has a	talcish feel; strongly calcareous; lime is both disseminated and segregated in soft masses; gradual irregular boundary. (8 to 20 inches)

	R--35 to 40 inches; hard partially metamorphosed sandstone, fractured and somewhat schistosic. Few calcite seams and pockets within the hard rock.

TYPE LOCATION: Glenn County,, California., 7 miles northwest of Stonyford 
In the Open Ridge area. In the SW 1/4 of See. 34., T19N, R7W. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: The solum is about 22 to 33 inches thick and
depth to bedrock is 30 to 45 inches. Soil temperature is 55 to 59 degrees F. and
mineralogy is vermiculitic. The soils are dry to at least the 12 inch 
depth for at least 60 consecutive days during most summers. 

The A horizons have colors with hues of 10YR and 7.5YR, values of 4 or 5 and chromas of 3. Textures are loam, gravelly loam and gravelly clay loam; structure is weak to moderate, medium to coarse subangalar blocky; consistence is hard or 
Slightly hard, friable, slightly plastic and slightly sticky to plastic and 
sticky, and reaction is slightly acid to neutral. 

The Bt horizons have colors with 5YR and 7.5YR hues in the B2t and 10YR and 2.5Y in the B3t. Chromas are 3 to 5 dry and 2 or 3 moist. The B3t is mottled. Textures are gravelly clay or gravelly heavy clay loam; structure is moderate medium and coarse subangular blocky consistence is very hard, firm, very plastic and very sticky. Reaction is slightly acid to neutral in the B2t and neutral to mildly alkaline in the B3t. 

The Cca horizon has hues of 2.5Y and 5Y with values of 5 or 6 dry and 4 moist. The texture is gravelly light clay or gravelly clay loan and structure is subangalar blocky. Consistence is hard to very hard, firm and sticky to very sticky. Reaction is mildly to moderately alkaline and the soils are strongly calcareous. 

COMPETING SERIES: These include the Rarrishj, Shingletown, Suther, Sutherlin, and Yorkville series. The Parrish soils have yellowish red, strongly acid Bt horizons and the Shingletown soils have mottled, very pale brown Bt horizons. The Suther soils have pale brown, medium acid lower Bt horizons and the Sutherlin soils have yellowish brown, strongly acid lower Bt horizons. The Yorkville soils have grayish 'brown and dark grayish brown A horizons and yellowish brown Bt horizons.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The Polebar soils occur on hilly to very steep uplands on hard sedimentary and metasedimentary rock. They occur at elevations of 20W to
3500 feet, in a subhumid mesothermal climate with mean annual rainfall of 25
to 40 inches with hot, dry summers and cool, moist winters. Mean annual
temperature is about 56 degrees F., average January temperature about 40 
degrees F., and average July temperature about 71 degrees F. Frost-free season averages about 120 to 150 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: he Laughlin soils without argillic horizons,
the Los Gatos soils with clay loam Bt horizons and the Parrish and Yorkville
soils. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well Drained with slow permeability and rapid
runoff.

USE AND VEGETATION: Open grass-woodland blue oak, digger pines and California Junipers. The principal use is grazing.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Northern Coast Ranges of California. The soils
are not extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Davis, California.

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Glenn County, California, 1957.

REMARKS: These soils formerly were classified in the Prairie soil group.

Series description was scanned and imported into the Ames database 01/2000. Format was adjusted at that time but the rest of the series was not updated. Competing series also were not updated.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
