LOCATION FAIRPOINT              OH+IL IN KY PA VA WV

Established Series
DJB-SLH/Rev. MDJ
12/2012

FAIRPOINT SERIES

MLRAs: 111 (Indiana and Ohio Till Plain), 113 (Central Claypan Areas), 114 (Southern Illinois and Indiana Thin Loess and Till Plain), 115 (Central Mississippi Valley Wooded Slopes), 120 (Kentucky and Indiana Sandstone and Shale Hills and Valleys), 122 (Highland Rim and Pennyroyal), 124 (Western Allegheny Plateau), 125 (Cumberland Plateau and Mountains), 126  (Central Allegheny Plateau), 127 (Eastern Allegheny Plateau and Mountains), 128 (Southern Appalachian Ridges and Valleys) and 139 (Lake Erie Glaciated Plateau)

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, active, nonacid, mesic Typic Udorthents

TYPICAL PEDON: Fairpoint gravelly clay loam on a 12 percent slope in clover. (Colors are for moist soil.)

    Ap--0 to 13 cm (0 to 5 inches); light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) gravelly clay loam; moderate medium and coarse granular structure; friable; many roots; 15 percent by volume fragments of sandstone, 5 percent by volume fragments of siltstone and few fragments of coal; neutral; abrupt smooth boundary. (0 to 20 cm thick)

    C1--13 to 43 cm (5 to 17 inches); variegated, 70 percent light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2), 20 percent brown (10YR 4/3) and 10 percent gray (10YR 5/1) very gravelly clay loam; massive; firm; few roots in vertical cracks; 30 percent by volume fragments of sandstone, 5 percent by volume fragments of siltstone and few fragments of coal; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary.

    C2--43 to 152 cm (17 to 60 inches); variegated, 70 percent light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2), 20 percent brown (10YR 4/3) and 10 percent gray (10YR 5/1) very gravelly clay loam; massive; firm; 35 percent by volume fragments of sandstone, 10 percent by volume fragments of siltstone and few fragments of coal; slightly acid. (Combined thickness of the C horizon is 152 cm or more.)

TYPE LOCATION:
State:  Ohio
County:  Belmont
USGS Topographic Quadrangle:  Fairview, Ohio
Latitude:  40.074167 N NAD 83
Longitude:  81.210278 W NAD 83
Directions:  Kirkwood Township, about 2,100 feet north and 850 feet east of the southwest corner, sec. 27, T. 9 N., R. 6 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Depth to Bedrock: Greater than 152 cm (60 inches)
Depth Class: Very deep
Rock Fragment Content: The A or Ap horizon ranges from 15 to 60 percent, by volume. The C horizon ranges from 35 to 60 percent, by volume, averaging 45 percent.
Rock Fragment Size: 2 mm to 25 cm, but can include stones and boulders
Rock Fragment Type: Nonacid siltstone, shale, sandstone, limestone and coal
Fine-Earth Fraction: Averages 18 to 35 percent clay in the control section
Soil Reaction: Moderately acid through neutral, except where limed

Range in Individual Horizons:
A or Ap horizon (if it occurs):
Color--hue of 7.5YR through 5Y, or neutral; value of 3 through 6; and chroma of 0 through 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--clay loam, silty clay loam, loam or silt loam

C horizon:
Color--hue of 7.5YR through 5Y, or neutral; value of 3 through 6; and chroma of 0 through 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--clay loam, silty clay loam, loam or silt loam

COMPETING SERIES:
Fiveblock soils--Fiveblock soils allow textures of sandy loam and loamy sand in the particle-size control section and require 65 percent or more gray, neutral sandstone.
Kaymine soils--Kaymine soils allow textures of loam or silt loam in the particle-size control section.
Laguardia (T) soils--Laguardia soils must have more than 10 percent construction debris fragments in the particle-size control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landscape: Hills
Landform: Hill and hillslope
Anthropogenic Features: Surface mine, spoil pile, spoil bank and reclaimed land
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, backslope, footslope and toeslope
Geomorphic Component: Interfluve, crest, head slope, nose slope, side slope and base slope
Parent Material: Coal extraction mine spoil derived from nonacid regolith of weathered fine- earth and fragments of neutral to calcareous shale, sandstone and siltstone
Slope: 0 to 90 percent
Mean Annual Air Temperature: 11 to 13 degrees C. (52 to 56 degrees F.)
Mean Annual Precipitation: 889 to 1143 mm (35 to 45 inches)

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
Bethesda soils--occur on similar landscape positions derived from acid surface mine overburden
Morristown soils--occur on similar landscape positions derived from calcareous surface mine overburden
Culleoka soils--formed in residuum from shale, siltstone, limestone and sandstone on undisturbed uplands
Dekalb soils--formed in residuum from sandstone on undisturbed uplands
Elba soils--formed in residuum from limestone, shale and siltstone on undisturbed uplands
Gilpin soils--formed in residuum from shale, siltstone and sandstone on undisturbed uplands
Guernsey soils--formed in residuum from siltstone, shale and limestone on undisturbed uplands
Latham soils--formed in residuum from shale and siltstone on undisturbed uplands
Lowell soils--formed in residuum from limestone and shale on undisturbed uplands
Westmoreland soils--formed in residuum from siltstone, sandstone and limestone on undisturbed uplands
Shelocta soils--formed in colluvium from shale, siltstone and sandstone on undisturbed uplands

DRAINAGE AND SATURATED HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY:
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Well drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: None
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Very high
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity: Low through moderately high in the upper part, and very low through moderately high in the lower part
Shrink-Swell Potential: Moderate

USE AND VEGETATION:
Major Uses: Wildlife habitat and recreational areas. The rough topography and coarse fragment content of unreclaimed areas make it impractical for agriculture and difficult for standard forest harvesting practices. Some reclaimed areas are used for hay or pasture, and increasingly, are also used for homesites. Reclaimed areas typically exhibit higher bulk densities, much lower saturated hydraulic conductivities and low organic matter in the surface horizon, making establishment of vegetation difficult.
Dominant Vegetation: Unreclaimed areas are naturally seeded deciduous forests with a few barren areas. Reclaimed areas are usually open grassland, including some legumes. A few reclaimed areas have been planted to trees, but mortality is high because of soil compaction.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Distribution: Ohio, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia
Extent: Large, about 417,000 acres identified at the time of this revision

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: MORGANTOWN, WEST VIRGINIA

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Belmont County, Ohio, 1978

REMARKS: Fairpoint soils were previously mapped as a variety of strip mine spoil and udorthents units.

Diagnostic horizons and soil characteristics recognized in this pedon are:
Ochric epipedon--the zone from 0 to 13 cm (Ap horizon)
Series control section--the zone from 0 to 200 cm

ADDITIONAL DATA: Laboratory test data is available for pedons BT-18, BT-19, BT-20 and JF-9 at The Ohio State University and S79IN55-17 in Indiana.

________________________________________
National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
