LOCATION FATIMA                 MO+AR

Established Series
Rev. FCW-KDV
02/2003

FATIMA SERIES

The Fatima series consists of very deep, moderately well drained, moderately permeable soils formed in alluvium. These soils are on flood plains and have slopes of 0 to 2 percent. Mean annual temperature is 53 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is 35 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, superactive, mesic Fluvaquentic Hapludolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Fatima silt loam - on a 0.5 percent slope in a cultivated field.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

   Ap--0 to 7 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silt loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak very fine granular structure; friable; few fine roots; neutral; clear smooth boundary.

   A--7 to 12 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silt loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak fine granular structure; friable; few fine roots; neutral; clear smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Ap and A horizon is 10 to 24 inches.)

   Bw--12 to 30 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; neutral; gradual smooth boundary.

   Bg--30 to 43 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine faint dark gray (10YR 4/1) Fe depletions and few fine distinct dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) Fe masses in ped interiors; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary. (Combined thickness of the Bw and Bg horizons is 12 to 36 inches.)

   Cg--43 to 64 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; massive, with weak bedding planes; friable; fine faint dark gray (10YR 4/1) Fe depletions and few fine distinct dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) Fe masses in ped interiors; slightly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Scotland County, Missouri; 2 miles northwest of Memphis; 2,500 feet west and 50 feet north of the center of sec. 35, T. 66 N., R.  12 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The particle-size control section averages 18 to 27 percent clay.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR; value of 2 or 3 moist, 4 or 5 dry; and chroma of 1 or 2. It commonly is silt loam but may be loam or silty clay loam. Reaction is slightly acid or neutral.

The B horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and commonly chroma of 2. Chroma of 3 is allowed if Fe depletions are present with value of 4 or more and chroma of 2 or less. It is moderately acid to neutral.

The Cg horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 1 or 2 and commonly is stratified. It is silt loam, loam or silty clay loam with less than 30 percent clay. Reaction is slightly acid or neutral.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Gilliam, Radford and Tice series.  Similar soils are the Amana, Dockery, and Nodaway series.  Gilliam soils have free calcium carbonate at depths less than 20 inches.  Radford soils have buried A horizons within a depth of 40 inches.  Tice soils are somewhat poorly drained and have redoximorphic features in the second one-fourth of the control section.  Amana soils have stratification in some part.  Dockery and Nodaway soils do not have mollic epipedons and are more stratified.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Fatima soils are on flood plains and have slopes of 0 to 2 percent. The soils formed in alluvium. The mean annual temperature ranges from 50 degrees to 56 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation ranges from 32 to 40 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Arbela, Belknap, Chequest, Wabash, and Westerville series. Arbela soils have an argillic horizon and are on slightly higher elevations. Belknap soils have less clay and are on similar positions. Chequest and Wabash soils have more clay and are on similar positions. Westerville soils do not have a mollic epipedon and are on a similar position.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained. Runoff is medium.  Permeability is moderate.  In undisturbed areas there is an apparent water table has an upper limit of 2.0 to 3.5 feet during November to April in most years.  These soil are subject to rare to frequent flooding.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are used to grow corn and soybeans.  Native vegetation is mixed hardwoods.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northeast Missouri and possibly southeast Iowa. The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Indianapolis, Indiana

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Scotland County, Missouri, 1969.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this series are:  mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 12 inches (Ap and A horizons); cambic horizon - the zone from approximately 12 inches to 43 inches (Bw and Bg horizons).


National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
