LOCATION FUBAR                  AK

Established Series
Rev. BEK/JPM/DLM
09/2007

FUBAR SERIES

Depth class: very deep
Drainage class: moderately well drained soils
Landform: floodplains and low terraces
Parent material: thin layer of loamy alluvium over stratified coarse textured alluvium
Slopes: 0 to 7 percent
Mean annual temperature: about 26 degrees F.
Mean annual precipitation: about 12 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy-skeletal, mixed Typic Cryofluvents

TYPICAL PEDON: Fubar fine sandy loam -- on a 1 percent slope under forest vegetation. (All colors are for moist soil)

	Oi--0 to 3 inches; slightly decomposed plant material; moderately acid (pH 5.6). (1 to 6 inches thick)

	A--3 to 5 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) fine sandy loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine and fine roots; slightly acid (pH 6.2); abrupt wavy boundary. (1 to 10 inches thick)

	2C--5 to 60 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) very gravelly sand stratified with thin lenses of silt loam and fine sandy loam; single grain; loose, nonsticky and nonplastic; 40 percent gravel, 10 percent cobble; slightly acid (pH 6.4).

TYPE LOCATION: Upper Tanana Area, Alaska; in the SW 1/4 of Section 15, T.10S., R.10E., Fairbanks Meridian.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Mean annual soil temperature: 32 to 34 degrees F.
Organic mat thickness: 1 to 6 inches
Loamy layer thickness: 1 to 10 inches
Depth to sands and gravel: 1 to 10 inches
Particle size control section textures: sand or loamy sand with occasional thin strata of silt loam and fine sandy loam, textures are modified by 35 to 85 percent total coarse fragments, 10 to 35 percent cobble and 25 to 50 percent gravel
Weighted average particle size is sandy-skeletal
Organic carbon: decreases irregularly with depth
Reaction: very strongly acid to neutral though out the profile

A horizon (when present):
Hue of 10YR or 2.5Y; moist value of 3 to 5, moist chroma of 2 to 4
Texture: fine sandy loam, very fine sandy loam, or silt loam

2C horizon: is variegated sand and gravel with thin strata of silt loam and fine sandy loam throughout

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Chenega, Hollow, Kidaqeni, and Malmesbury series in the same family. All of these soils have mean annual soil temperatures greater than 34 degrees F. Hollow soils are calcareous. Malmesbury and Chenega soils also have O horizons developed in litter from Sitka spruce forests.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: 
Depth class: very deep
Drainage class: moderately well drained soils
Landform: floodplains and low terraces
Parent material: thin layer of loamy alluvium over stratified coarse textured alluvium
Slopes: 0 to 7 percent
Climate: subarctic continental with long, cold winters and short, warm summers
Mean annual temperature: 25 to 28 degrees F.
Mean annual precipitation: 10 to inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These include the Chena, Jarvis, Salchaket, and Tanana soils  on similar landforms. Chena soils are not stratified. Jarvis and Salchaket soils are deeper than 10 inches to the underlying skeletal material. Tanana soils have permafrost within the control section.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Moderately well drained, runoff is slow, saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderate in the loamy surface and rapid in the underlying material.

USE AND VEGETATION: Fubar soils have a native vegetation of white spruce, cottonwood, and willows.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: MLRA 229 Interior Alaska Lowlands. The series is of minor extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Upper Tanana Area, Alaska, 1986

REMARKS: Diagnostic features and horizons recognized in this profile include: Assumed irregular organic carbon: decrease with depth based on stratification and colors
Sandy-skeletal particle size: 50 percent coarse fragments from 2 to 60 inches; Temperature regime: cryic

The Fubar series incorporates stratified, flooded soils that were formerly correlated as part of the Chena series.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
