LOCATION FURLONG                MI

Established Series
Rev. GDW-WEF
11/94

FURLONG SERIES

The Furlong series consists of moderately deep, somewhat excessively drained soils formed in sandy deposits underlain by limestone on ground moraines and outwash plains.  Permeability is rapid. Slopes range from 0 to 6 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 32 inches, and mean annual temperature is about 43 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy, mixed, frigid Typic Haplorthods

TYPICAL PEDON:  Furlong sand - forested.  (Colors are for moist soils unless otherwise stated.)

   Oe--0 to 1 inches; partially decomposed leaf litter. (0 to 3 inches thick)

   A--1 to 2 inches; black (10YR 2/1) sand, gray (10YR 5/1) dry; single grain; loose; many very fine and fine roots; very strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (0 to 4 inches thick)

   E--2 to 5 inches; pinkish gray (5YR 6/2) sand, pinkish gray (7.5YR 6/2) dry; single grain; loose; many fine to coarse roots; about 5 percent gravel; very strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary. (2 to 4 inches thick)

   Bhs--5 to 7 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) sand; single grain; loose; many fine to coarse roots; ortstein occupies 15 percent of the horizon and occurs as weakly cemented chunks; less than 5 percent gravel; very strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary. (1 to 2 inches thick)

   Bs1--7 to 13 inches; dark brown (7.5YR 3/4) sand; single grain; loose; common fine and medium roots; ortstein occupies 2 percent of the horizon and occurs as strongly cemented chunks; about 5 percent gravel; very strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.

   Bs2--13 to 19 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/3) sand; single grain; loose; few fine roots; strongly cemented ortstein in less than 2 percent of the horizon; moderately acid; abrupt wavy boundary. (Combined thickness of the Bs horizons is 4 to 15 inches)

   C--19 to 22 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) sand; single grain; loose; very few fine roots; about 5 percent gravel; slightly alkaline; abrupt smooth boundary. (0 to 12 inches thick)

   2R--22 inches; fractured hard limestone bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Mackinac County, Michigan; about 7 miles northeast of the village of Allenville, 165 feet east and 2,805 feet south of the northwest corner of sec. 34, T. 43 N., R. 4 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  (Unless otherwise stated the depths mentioned in the following paragraph are measured from the mineral soil surface.) The depth to limestone bedrock ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Gravel content ranges from 0 to 10 percent and cobble content ranges from 0 to 5 percent throughout. Rock fragments are mainly limestone, but include some igneous and metamorphic fragments.

The A horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR or is neutral, value of 2 or 3 and chroma of 0 to 3. It is sand or loamy sand. Reaction ranges from very strongly acid to slightly acid.

The E horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR; value of 5 to 7; and chroma of 1 or 3.  It is sand or loamy sand. Reaction ranges from strongly acid to slightly acid.

The Bhs horizon has hue of 5YR or 7.5YR and value and chroma of 2 or 3.  It is sand or loamy sand. Reaction is strongly acid or moderately acid.

The Bs horizons have hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 4 to 6.  It is sand or loamy sand. Reaction ranges from strongly acid to slightly acid.

Some pedons have a BC horizon with hue of 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 6.  It is sand or loamy sand. Reaction ranges from strongly acid to neutral.

The C horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 to 6, and chroma of 3 to 5. It is sand or loamy sand. Reaction ranges from strongly acid to moderately alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are the Adams, Deerton, Kalkaska, Liminga and Springlake series.  None of these soils except Deerton have lithic contacts within 60 inches.  Deerton soils have dominantly sandstone fragments in the solum and have a lithic contact to sandstone at 20 to 40 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Furlong soils are on nearly level to sloping areas on ground moraines and outwash plains.   Slopes are from 0 to 6 percent.   They formed in sandy glacial drift overlying limestone bedrock. Mean annual precipitation is 27 to 33 inches, and the mean annual temperature is about 41 to 45 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Greylock, Kalkaska, Longrie, Paquin, Rubicon, and Wallace soils.  Greylock soils are very deep, loamy soils on similar landscape positions. The Kalkaska, Rubicon and Wallace soils are very deep sandy soils on similar landscape positions.  The Longrie soils are coarse-loamy, have bedrock at depths of 20 to 40 inches and are on similar landscape positions.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat excessively drained. Surface runoff is slow.  Permeability is rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most of this soil is in second growth woodland.  Quaking aspen, red maple, and sugar maple are the dominant tree species.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The eastern and southeastern part of the Upper Peninsula and the northern part of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: St. Paul, Minnesota

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Mackinac County, Michigan, 1994.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: ochric epipedon - the zone from the mineral surface to 5 inches (A and E horizon) albic horizon - the zone from 2 to 5 inches (E horizon); spodic horizon - the zone from 5 to 19 inches (Bhs, Bs1 and Bs2 horizons).

Many of the areas originally mapped as the Duel Series would now be classified as Furlong.

ADDITIONAL DATA: Soil Interpretation Record No.: MI0673.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
