LOCATION TALQUIN                FL

Established Series
Rev. TES; AGH; GRB
10/2003

TALQUIN SERIES

The Talquin series consists of very deep, poorly drained, moderately permeable soil on flats.  They formed in sandy marine sediments on the Lower Coastal Plain.  Near the type location, the mean annual temperature is about 68 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 55 inches.  Slopes range from 0 to 2 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy, siliceous, thermic Aeric Alaquods

TYPICAL PEDON:  Talquin fine sand--on a smooth 1 percent slope in cleared areas.                 (Colors are for moist soil.)

    Ap--0 to 10 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) rubbed, fine sand; weak medium granular structure; very friable; many fine, medium, and coarse roots; many uncoated sand grains give a salt-and-pepper appearance; extremely acid; clear smooth boundary.  (7 to 10 inches thick)

    E--10 to 25 inches; light gray (10YR 7/1) fine sand; single grained; loose; few fine, medium, and coarse roots; common medium faint streaks of gray (10YR 5/1); strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (8 to 23 inches thick)

    Bh--25 to 27 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) fine sand; weak medium granular structure; very friable, noncemented; common uncoated sand grains; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (2 to 6 inches thick)

    Bw/Bh--27 to 37 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) fine sand; weak medium granular structure; very friable, noncemented; sand grains thinly coated with colloidal organic matter; common medium faint dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) stains along root channels; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (0 to 12 inches thick)

    C--37 to 80 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) fine sand; single grained; loose; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Leon County, Florida; approximately 1.5 miles east of Natural Bridge and about 30 feet north of Natural Bridge Road; SE 1/4, SE 1/4, Sec. 21, T. 2 S., R. 2 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 25 to 50 inches.  The Bh horizon is less than 7 inches in thickness.  Combined thickness of the A and E horizons is less than 30 inches.  Reaction ranges from extremely acid to strongly acid throughout.

The A horizon, after rubbing, has hue of 10YR, value of 2 to 4, and chroma of 0 to 2; or it is neutral with value of 2 to 4.  Unrubbed, this horizon is a mixture of white uncoated sand grains and black organic matter.  When dry, it has a salt-and-pepper appearance.  Texture is sand or fine sand.

The E horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 5 to 8, and chroma of 0 to 2; or it is neutral with value of 5 to 8.  Vertical streaks and areas of organic matter accumulation in shades of black to gray range from none to common.  Texture is sand or fine sand.

The Bh horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 2 to 4, and chroma of 1 to 4; or it is neutral with value of 3.  Sand grains are thinly to moderately coated with colloidal organic matter.  It has a weighted average of less than 0.6 percent organic carbon in the matrix of the upper 12 inches or 2.3 percent or more in the upper 2 cm.  Texture is sand or fine sand.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 0 to 4; or it is neutral with value of 5 to 7.  Redoximorphic features in shades of gray, brown, or yellow range from none to common.  Texture is sand or fine sand.  

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Leon and Witherbee series in the same family.  They have spodic horizons more than 6 inches in thickness.  In addition, the very poorly or poorly drained Leon soils are on similar to lower positions and the somewhat poorly drained Witherbee soils are on higher positions.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Talquin soils are on flatwoods on the Lower Coastal Plain.  Slopes range from 0 to 2 percent.  They formed in thick beds of sandy marine sediments.  The climate is humid semitropical.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 50 to 60 inches and the average annual temperature ranges from 65 to 70 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Leon series and the Chipley, Foxworth, Rutlege, and Sapelo series.  The somewhat poorly drained Chipley and Foxworth soils are on higher positions, and do not have spodic horizons.  The very poorly drained Rutlege soils are on lower positions, do not have spodic horizons, are sandy throughout, and have umbric epipedons.  The somewhat poorly drained Sapelo soils are on similar positions, have better developed spodic horizons and argillic horizons beneath the spodic horizon.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained; rapid permeability in the A and E horizons and moderate to moderately rapid permeability in the Bh horizon. 

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of Talquin soils are used for forestry.  A few areas are in tame pasture.  The native vegetation consists of longleaf pine, slash pine, waxmyrtle, scattered water oak, fetterbush, gallberry, running oak, sawpalmetto, chalky bluestem, broomsedge bluestem, indiangrass, panicums, and pineland threeawn.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Gulf Coastal Plain.  The series is of small known extent but may also occur on the Atlantic Coastal Plain.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Auburn, Alabama.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Leon County, Florida; 1979.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:

Ochric epipedon  the zone from the surface to a depth of 25 inches (Ap and E horizons).

Albic horizon  the zone from 10 to 25 inches (E horizon).

Spodic horizon  the zone from 27 to 37 inches (Bh2 horizon).

Aquic condition - endosaturation - all layers below about 6 inches.

The water table is within depths of 6 to 18 inches for 1 to 3 months during periods of high rainfall and within depths of 18 to 40 inches for 9 months or more during most years.

Talquin soils were formerly included in the Leon series.  This revision limits these soils to (entic) Alaquods, ie. Alaquods that have a spodic horizon that has a weighted average of less than 0.6 percent organic carbon in the matrix of the upper 30 cm of the spodic horizon, and the upper subhorizon of the spodic horizon has less than 2.3 percent organic carbon in the upper 2 cm; or the subhorizon with 2.3 percent or more organic carbon is present in 90 percent or less of each pedon.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Characterization sample: Sampled as S33-20-(1-10) and S37-21-(1-5), IFAS, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
