LOCATION TOUTLE                 WA

Established Series
Rev. WAC/JWR/RJE
05/2001

TOUTLE SERIES

The Toutle series consists of deep, excessively drained
soils formed in alluvium and volcanic mudflows on flood
plains, terraces and terrace escarpments.  Sloes are 0 to 45
percent.  The average annual precipitation is about 55
inches.  The mean annual air temperature is about 50 degrees
F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Ashy, glassy, mesic Humic Vitrixerands

TYPICAL PEDON:  Toutle loamy sand - pasture  (Moist colors
used unless otherwise stated)

    A--0 to 12 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
loamy sand, brown (10YR 5/3) when dry; single grain; loose;
nonsticky and nonplastic; abundant fine and medium roots;
few pumice gravels; neutral (pH 6.6); abrupt wavy boundary.
10 to 12 inches thick.

    C1--12 to 36 inches; very dark grayish brown (2.5Y 3/2) stratified loamy sand, sandy loams, and very fine sandy
loam, light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) when dry; single grain;
loose, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine roots; moderate
amount of pumice gravels; neutral (pH 6.8); abrupt wavy
boundary.  13 to 24 inches thick.

    C2--36 to 60 inches; Multicolored gravelly medium sand, dominantly dark gray (10YR 4/1), light gray (10YR 6/1) when
dry, with pockets of gravelly sand; single grain; loose,
nonsticky and nonplastic; no roots; gravel are dominantly
pumice; neutral (pH 7.0).

TYPE LOCATION:  Cowlitz County, Washington.  Approximately
0.6 miles south of Woodland, Washington, and 250 feet south
of the junction of the Pekin South Road and the Whelan Road,
about 875 feet west and 1,500 feet south of the northeast
corner of Sec. 25, T. 5 N., R. 1 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Texture of the A1 horizon ranges
from gravelly loamy sand to fine sandy loam.  When moist,
color of the A1 horizon ranges in value from 2 to 3 and in
chroma from 1 to 3 in hues 10YR and 2.5Y.  The C horizons
are mostly loamy sand or coarser stratified with lenses of
fine sandy loam or very fine sandy loam 1/2 to 3 inches
thick.  Gravel content through the profile varies from about
5 to 50 percent.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Forward and Synarep soils
in the Typic subgroup and the Hardesty, Hardister, Mansonia
and Zark series in an ashy family of Mollic Vitrandepts.
Forward and Synarep have an ochric epipedon.  Hardesty,
Hardister, Mansonia and Zark are all finer than loamy sand
in the particle-size control section and  have a B horizon.
A similar soil in the same subgroup, but in a different
family:  Guler are fine sandy loamy soils underlain at
depths less than 40 inches by gravelly sand.  A similar soil
in a different subgroup:  Chelan are moderately coarse
textured soils over very gravelly coarse sandy loam and have
a very dark grayish brown Mollic epipedon.  A similar soil
in a different order:  Pilchuck soils have an Ochric
epipedon and contain little or no pumice material.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Toutle soils occupy nearly level flood
plains and nearly level and gently sloping terraces and
steep and very steep terrace fronts at elevations of 15 to
700 feet.  They are developing in stratified pumice sandy
alluvium.  The climate is characterized by dry summers and
cool wet winter.  The mean air temperature is January is 35
degrees F., and in July it is 63 degrees F.  The mean annual temperature is 50 degrees F.  The mean annual precipitation
ranges from 38 to 70 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include Speelyai and
Kelso soils.  Speelyai soils have an ochric epipedon and a
paralithic contact with dense lahar at 10 to 20 inches.
Kelso soils are fine silty and have an argillic horizon.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Excessively drained with very
slow to medium runoff.  Permeability is rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION:  These soils are used primarily for
timber production, but cleared areas are used for growing
hay and pasture crops.  The principal tree vegetation is
Douglas-fir, red alder, western hemlock, western redcedar,
Oregon white oak,  lodgepole pine, black cottonwood, bigleaf
maple, with an understory of cascara, vine maple, swordfern,
bracken fern, wild rose, willow, oceanspray, and blackberry.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Along major rivers in Cowlitz
County, Washington.  This soil is very limited in extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Reconnaissance Survey of Southwestern Washington, 1911.

REMARKS:  These soils should be classified as ashy mesic
Mollic Vitrandepts.  These soils were all covered by
mudflows from the 1980 eruption of Mt. St. Helens.  The
series will become inactive with the correlation of the
resurvey of Cowlitz County Washington.  Diagnostic horizons
and features recognized in this pedon are a Mollic or umbric
epipedon from the mineral surface to 12 inches and the upper
14 inches of the profile is assumed to be more than 60
percent volcanic ash and pumice.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
