LOCATION TRACHUTE               UT

Established Series
Rev. JMD/RLM
08/2007

TRACHUTE SERIES

The Trachute series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately rapidly permeable soils that formed in mixed eolian and alluvium from sandstone and shale on terraces and benches.  Slopes range from 2 to 8 percent.  The average annual precipitation is about 6 inches and mean annual temperature is about 50 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, superactive, calcareous, mesic Typic Torriorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Trachute loamy fine sand, rangeland.  (Colors are for air-dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

    A--0 to 3 inches; reddish brown (2.5YR 5/4) loamy fine sand, reddish brown (2.5YR 4/4) moist; single grained; loose, few fine roots; common interstitial pores; moderately calcareous; carbonates are disseminated; moderately alkaline (pH 8.2); clear smooth boundary.  (3 to 5 inches thick)

    C1--3 to 8 inches; reddish brown (2.5YR 5/4) fine sandy loam, reddish brown (2.5YR 4/4) moist; weak medium prismatic structure; soft, very friable; few fine, few medium roots; few fine tubular pores; moderately calcareous; carbonates are disseminated; moderately alkaline (pH 8.2); clear wavy boundary.  (0 to 14 inches thick)

    C2yk--8 to 30 inches; light reddish brown (2.5YR 6/4) fine sandy loam, reddish brown (2.5YR 5/4) moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few fine, few medium roots; few fine tubular pores; strongly calcareous; gypsum and carbonates are in veins and disseminated; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4); gradual smooth boundary.  (15 to 36 inches thick)

    C3yk--30 to 60 inches; light reddish brown (2.5YR 6/4) fine sandy loam, reddish brown (2.5YR 5/4) moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few fine roots; few fine tubular pores; strongly calcareous; gypsum and carbonates are in veins and disseminated; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4).

TYPE LOCATION:  Wayne County, Utah; 6 miles north, 7 miles east of Hanksville, Utah; NW 1/4 of SE 1/4, sec. 10, T. 27 S., R. 12 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  

Soil moisture: The soil is dry in all parts of the moisture control section 75 to 90 percent of the time that the soil temperature at a depth of 20 inches exceeds 41 degrees F. Typic aridic moisture regime.

A horizon
Hue: 2.5YR through 7.5YR 
Value: 5 or 6 dry
Chroma: 3 through 8
Reaction: moderately alkaline to strongly alkaline.

C horizon
Hue: 2.5YR through 7.5YR 
Value: 5 through 8 dry
Chroma: 3 through 6
Texture of the particle-size control section: sandy loam, or fine sandy loam but may have thin strata of loamy fine sand in some pedons
Gypsum: contains few to many gypsum crystals, seams and veins that increases with depth
Reaction: moderately alkaline to strongly alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Apron (WY), Fang (NV), Fruitland (NM), Ganaflan (NV), Geer (NV), Jeddito (AZ), Jenrid (UT), Kumiva (NV), Marcou (AZ), Mazuma (NV), Moepitz (UT), Piltdown (NV), Shotnick (UT), Sodaspring (NV), Tooele (UT), Vanderhoff (ID), Wentridge (UT) and Worland (WY) series. 
Apron, Fang, Fruitland, Ganaflan, Geer, Jeddito, Mazuma, Vanderhoff, and Worland soils have 10YR hue or yellower. 
Moepitz, Vanderhoff and Wentridge soils have paralithic contact at 20 to 40 inches. Fang, Geer, Kumiva and Piltdown soils have volcanic ash, glass, or other pyroclastic material in the control section. Jeddito soils have contrasting stratification in the control section. Jenrid and Shotnick soils have mean annual soil temperature less than 51 degrees F. and also have precipitation distributed evenly throughout the year and are more moist in May and June. Sodaspring and Toole soils are saline-sodic.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Trachute soils are on reworked sandstone controlled upland benches at elevations of 4,300 to 5,200 feet.  The soils formed in coarse textured gypsiferous deposits on 2 to 8 percent slopes.  The mean annual temperature is 50 to 52 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation is about 5 to 8 inches.  The freeze-free period is 140 to 160 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Moenkopie, Sheppard, Goblin and Robroost soils.  Goblin and Moenkopie soils have a lithic or paralithic contact at less than 20 inches.  Sheppard soils have a sandy particle-size control section.  Robroost soils have a gypsic horizon.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow runoff; moderately rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly for rangeland and wildlife habitat.  Potential native vegetation is galleta, Indian ricegrass, dropseed, globemallow, fourwing saltbush, and Mormon-tea.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southeastern Utah.  The soils of this series are not extensive; their total acreage is about 6,000 acres. MLRA 35.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Henry Mountain Area, Parts of Garfield, Kane and Wayne Counties, Utah, 1985.  Named after Trachute draw in the survey area.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
