LOCATION TRESTLE                NY  

Established Series
Rev. LC-STS-SWF
04/2003

TRESTLE SERIES

The Trestle series consists of very deep, well drained soils formed in stratified alluvium over outwash or valley fill materials. They are nearly level to gently sloping soils along high gradient streams and in fan positions. Permeability is moderate to moderately rapid in the solum and rapid in the substratum. Slope ranges from 0 to 6 percent. Mean annual temperature is about 47 degrees F. and mean annual precipitation is about 39 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, active, mesic Fluventic Dystrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON: Trestle silt loam -- with 1 percent slope in a cultivated field. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.) 

   Ap -- 0 to 10 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/2) silt loam; weak medium granular structure; friable; common fine roots; common fine pores; 10 percent gravel; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary. (6 to 11 inches thick.)

   Bw1 -- 10 to 18 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) gravelly silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and few coarse roots; common fine and few coarse pores; 15 percent gravel; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary.

   Bw2 -- 18 to 23 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) gravelly loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; very friable; few fine and coarse roots; common fine and few coarse pores; 25 percent gravel; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary. (Combined thickness of the B horizon ranges from 7 to 19 inches.)

   2C -- 23 to 72 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) very gravelly coarse sandy loam; massive; loose; 60 percent gravel and cobblestones; moderately acid. 

TYPE LOCATION: Chenango County, New York; Town of Guilford, 0.25 miles west of County Route 35 and 170 feet south of Trestle Road, in a cultivated field. USGS Sidney, NY topographic quadrangle; Latitude 42 degrees, 22 minutes, 29 seconds N. and Longitude 75 degrees, 26 minutes, 11 seconds W. NAD 1927.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness ranges from 15 to 30 inches. Depth to bedrock is greater than 60 inches. Rock fragments, ranging from pebbles to flagstone size, are 5 to 25 percent of the volume of the A horizon, 15 to 45 percent of the B horizon, and 40 to 70 percent of the substratum. The reaction is strongly acid to moderately acid in the A horizon unless limed and moderately acid to slightly acid below.

The A horizon has hue of 5YR, 7.5YR, or 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 or 3. Texture is loam or silt loam in the fine earth fraction. Structure is weak to strong, fine or medium granular. Consistence is very friable or friable.

The B horizon has hue of 5YR through 10YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 3 or 4. Texture is sandy loam to silt loam in the fine earth fraction. Structure is very weak to moderate, fine or medium subangular blocky. Consistence is very friable or friable.

The C or 2C horizon has hue of 5YR through 2.5Y, value of 3 or 6, and chroma of 2 or 4. Texture is coarse sandy loam to silt loam in the fine earth fraction. Consistence is loose or very friable.

COMPETING SERIES: The Beanblossom series is in the same family. The Beanblossom soils have bedrock at depths of 40 to 60 inches. 

The Barbour, Chenango, Hamlin, Howard, Occum, Tioga, Tunkhannock and Wappinger series are similar soils in related families. Barbour soils average less than 35 percent rock fragments in the control section. The Chenango and Tunkhannock soils are not subject to flooding. Hamlin soils have coarse-silty, particle-size control sections. Howard soils have an argillic horizon. Occum and Tioga soils have coarse-loamy particle-size control sections and Wappinger soils have coarse-loamy over sandy or sandy-skeletal particle-size control sections. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The Trestle soils are along high gradient streams in narrow upland valleys and in fan positions. Slope ranges from 0 to 6 percent. They formed in stratified alluvium over outwash or valley fill deposits. Mean annual air temperature ranges from 45 degrees to 50 degrees F.; mean annual precipitation, from 33 to 45 inches; mean growing season, from 120 to 180 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: Barbour, Basher, Deposit, Hamlin, Teel and Wayland soils are on nearby flood plains. Chenango, Tunkhannock, and related soils formed in outwash are on nearby higher terraces. Deposit soils are on similar landscapes in slightly lower positions. Valois, Maplecrest, Bath, Lackawanna, Lordstown and their related soils are on adjoining uplands. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained. The potential for surface runoff is negligible to low. Permeability is moderate to moderately rapid in the solum and rapid in the C horizon. These soils are subject to occasional flooding. 

USE AND VEGETATION: Most of these soils are used for crops and pasture. Crops are alfalfa, mixed hay, corn, and small grains. Native vegetation is sugar maple, quaking aspen, black cherry, red oak, white pine, and hemlock.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Western, central and southern New York and northern Pennsylvania. MLRA 140. The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Chenango County, New York, 1982. 

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and other features recognized in the typical pedon are:
1. Cambic horizon - from 10 to 23 inches (the Bw horizon).
2. Udic soil moisture regime (a humid, temperate climate).
3. Fluventic subgroup - organic carbon decreases irregularly with depth or is 0.2 percent or more at a depth of at least 50
inches below the soil surface.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
