LOCATION TULOSO                 NM

Established Series
Rev. TEH-RJA-ACT
10/2000

TULOSO SERIES

The Tuloso series consists of shallow, well drained, moderately rapidly permeable soils that formed in alluvium and colluvium derived from sedimentary rocks. Tuloso soils are on hills, benches, and ridges. Slope ranges from 1 to 35 percent. Mean annual precipitation is about 16 inches and mean annual temperature is about 50 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, mesic Lithic Haplustepts

TYPICAL PEDON: Tuloso stony sandy loam - woodland. (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

    A--0 to 3 inches; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) stony sandy loam, brown (7.5YR4/4) moist; weak thin platy structure; loose, very friable, nonsticky andnonplastic; many fine and very fine roots; few very fine tubular pores; 25percent pebbles and stones; neutral; clear smooth boundary. (2 to 5 inchesthick)

    Bw--3 to 11 inches; yellowish red (5YR 5/6) very stony loam, reddish brown(5YR 4/4) moist; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; slightly hard,very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many fine, and commonmedium and coarse roots; few fine tubular pores; 40 percent cobbles andstones; neutral; abrupt wavy boundary. (6 to 15 inches thick)

    R--11 inches; hard sandstone.

TYPE LOCATION: San Miguel County, New Mexico; near the end of Maes road;350 feet north and 500 feet east of the southwest corner, sec. 27, T. 17N., R. 22 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil Moisture: An ustic moisture regime bordering on aridic. Intermittentlymoist in some part of the SMCS December through March and June throughSeptember.

Soil Temperature: 49 to 55 degrees F.
Depth to bedrock: 10 to 20 inches
Rock fragments in the particle-size control section: 35 to 60 percent on aweighted average, with more than 50 percent of the total being stones andcobbles and less than 50 percent of the total being pebbles.
Reaction: Neutral to moderately alkaline

A horizon:
Hue: 7.5YR or 10YR
Value: 4 to 6 dry, 3 or 4 moist
Chroma: 3 or 4
Texture: sandy loam, fine sandy loam or loam

B horizon:
Hue: 5YR, 7.5YR, or 10YR
Value: 4 or 5 dry, 3 or 4 moist
Chroma: 4 to 6
Texture: fine sandy loam or loam

COMPETING SERIES: This is the Wodomont (AZ) series. Similar soils are the Sombodoro and Travessilla series. Wodomont soils receive over half of their annual precipitation amounts during the winter months, are driest during May and June, and occur in slightly warmer areas. Sombodoro soils have a clayey argillic horizon. Travessilla soils have an aridic moisture regime and do not have a cambic horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Tuloso soils are on hills, ridges and small benches onsandstone controlled landscapes. They formed in alluvium and colluviumderived from sandstone. Mean annual precipitation ranges from 12 to 18inches, two thirds of which falls in the months of June through September.Mean annual temperature ranges from 47 to 54 degrees F. The frost-freeseason ranges from 130 to 160 days and elevation ranges from 5,000 to 7,500feet.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Bernal and Ribera soils andthe competing Sombodoro soils. Bernal soils have a mollic epipedon. Riberasoils have an argillic horizon and have a lithic contact at depths of 20 to40 inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained. Permeability of the soil materialis moderately rapid above a very slowly permeable lithic contact with sandstone.Runoff is low on slopes less than 1 percent, medium on 1 to 3 percentslopes, high on 3 to 5 percent slopes, and very high on slopes greater than5 percent.

USE AND VEGETATION: Used for native range and fuel wood production. Presentvegetation is mainly pinyon pine, juniper, oak brush, blue grama, sideoatsgrama, and little bluestem.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Northeastern New Mexico. The soils are of moderateextent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED: San Miguel County Area, New Mexico, 1977.

REMARKS: Classification change from Ustochrepts to Haplustepts based on application of the eighth edition of Soil Taxonomy, 1998.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon: 0 to 3 inches. (A horizon)

Cambic horizon: 3 to 11 inches. (Bw horizon)

Lithic contact: Hard sandstone at 11 inches.

Taxomomic Version: Keys to Soil Taxonomy, Eighth Edition of Soil Taxonomy, 1998

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
