LOCATION TURNBULL               FL

Established Series
Rev. RBH; JFB; GRB
11/2003

TURNBULL SERIES

The Turnbull series consists of very deep, very poorly drained, very slowly permeable soils near sea level and are flooded periodically by tidal overwash.   They formed in clayey and sandy estuarine deposits.  Near the type location, the mean annual temperature is about 72 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 55 inches.  Slopes are less than 1 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Fine, smectitic, nonacid, hyperthermic Typic Hydraquents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Turnbull muck--in a saltgrass tidal marsh. (Colors are for wet soil unless otherwise stated.)

     A--0 to 14 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) rubbed, mucky sandy clay loam; massive; slightly sticky; many fine roots; estimated mineral content about 35 percent and clay content about 15 percent; about 33 percent fiber, 10 percent rubbed; has odor; slightly alkaline in 0.01M calcium chloride when wet and  moderately acid in .01M calcium chloride when dry; gradual smooth boundary. (8 to 14 inches thick)

     Cg--14 to 50 inches; dark greenish gray (5GY 4/1) clay; massive; sticky; clay squeezes easily between fingers; estimated n value 1.5; many fine roots, few medium roots; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (20 to 36 inches thick)

     2Cg--50 to 80 inches; dark greenish gray (5GY 4/1) fine sand; single grained; loose; sand stratified with layers of loamy fine sand and fine shells; slightly alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Volusia County, Florida; in a tidal marsh about 150 feet east of Bulow Creek and about 50 feet northwest of a connecting road between Old Dixie Highway and John Anderson Highway.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Reaction ranges from slightly acid to slightly alkaline in A horizon in 0.01M calcium chloride and from slightly acid to moderately alkaline in the Cg horizon in water in its natural state.  Sulfur content ranges from a trace to 0.75 percent in all horizons.  The electrical conductivity of the saturation extract in mmhos/cm is more than 16 in all horizons.

The Oa or Oe horizon, where present, is less than 8 inches in thickness.  It has hue of 10YR to 5Y, value 2 to 4, and chroma of 1 or less; or it is neutral with value of 2 to 4.  It is composed of sapric or hemic material.  Texture is muck, mucky-peat, or peat.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR to 5Y, value 2 to 4, and chroma of 2 or less; or it is neutral with value of 2 to 4.  Texture is sand, loamy sand, sandy loam, sandy clay loam, or their mucky analogs. 

The Cg horizon has hue of 5Y to 5G, value 4 to 6, and chroma of 1.  It flows easily between fingers when squeezed.  The n value is more than 1.  Thin strata or lenses of fine sand, loamy fine sand, or fine sandy loam range from none to common.  Texture is clay.

The 2Cg horizon has hue of 10YR to 5GY, value of 3 to 6, and chroma of 2 or less; or it is neutral with value of 2 to 5.  Texture is loamy fine sand or fine sand, a mixture of loamy fine sand, fine sand and shell fragments, stratified material of loamy fine sand, or fine sand and shells with thin discontinuous strata of fine sandy loam, sandy loam, sandy clay loam, sandy clay, or clay.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Caplen, Creole, Gentilly, Leerco, Mckee, and Riomar series in the same family.  All of these soils are in similar positions.  Caplen, Creole, Leerco, and Mckee soils do not have shells or shell fragments below a depth of 40 inches.  In addition, Creole soils have salinity from 4 to 16 dS/m. in surface layers.  Gentilly soils have an n value less than 1.0 throughout the soil.  Riomar soils are moderately deep to limestone bedrock

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Turnbull soils are in tidal marsh areas of estuaries.  Slopes are less than 1 percent.  Elevations are approximately sea level.  They formed in clayey and sandy estuarine sediments.  The climate is humid subtropical.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 50 to 60 inches and the average annual air temperature ranges from 71 to 73 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  There are no other associated soils in the tidal marsh in Volusia County.  Myakka, Pomello, and Wabasso soils are on adjacent higher positions to the tidal marsh.  All these soils are mineral soils, are Spodosols, and are better drained.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Very poorly drained; very slow Permeability.
 
USE AND VEGETATION:  Turnbull soils are used for wildlife habitat.  They serve as a spawning area and are an important link in the food chain of many commercial and sport fin fish as well as shellfish.  Native vegetation consists of needlegrass rush, smooth cordgrass, bushy sea-oxeye, marshhay cordgrass, glasswort, bigleaf sumpweed, and seashore saltgrass.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Atlantic Coast of Central Florida.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Auburn, Alabama.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Volusia County, Florida; 1977.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:

N value ranges from 1.0 to 1.5 (Cg horizon).

Fluctuating tides overwash the surface periodically.

This series was formerly mapped as tidal marsh.  

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Characterization Sample:  S64-30. IFAS, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.  Additional Data is available on a pedon sampled with number S75FL127-30(1-3).  Characterization data was obtained from the University of Florida and engineering test data from the Florida Department of Transportation.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
