LOCATION TUSKAHOMA              OK

Established Series
Rev. EJA:RCB:JWF
07/2022

TUSKAHOMA SERIES

The Tuskahoma series consists of shallow, moderately well drained, very slowly permeable soils that formed in material weathered from shales of Pennsylvania Age.  These soils are on crest of ridges or convex uplands in the valleys of the Ouachita Mountains.  Slopesare 1 to 20 percent.  Mean annual temperature is 63 degrees F., and mean annual precipitation is 46 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Clayey, mixed, active, thermic, shallow Albaquic Hapludalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Tuskahoma loam--rangeland  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwisestated.)

     A1--0 to 5 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) loam; Moderate fine granular structure; friable; 10 percent sandstone gravel by volume; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (3 to 9 inches thick)

     B2t--5 to 10 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) clay; many fine distinct yellowish red (5YR 5/6) and a few fine faint dark grayish brown mottles; moderate medium blocky structure; firm; thin clay films continuous on faces of peds; few shale fragments; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (3 to 9 inches thick)

     B3--10 to 15 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) shaly clay; common fine distinct yellowish red (5YR 5/6) mottles; weak medium blocky structure; firm; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; 25 percent shale fragments by volume; moderately acid; gradual irregular boundary.  (0 to 8 inches thick)

     Cr--15 to 30 inches; gray (10YR 5/1) shale bedrock with thin layers of shaly clay; tilted 40 degrees from horizontal; neutral.

TYPE LOCATION:  LeFlore County, Oklahoma; about 2 miles east of Talihina; 1,250 feet east and 975 feet north of the southwest corner of sec. 5, T. 3 N., R. 22 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness and depth to shale bedrock ranges from 10 to 20 inches.

The A1 horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Texture is silt loam, loam, silty clay loam, stony silt loam, stony loam, or stony silty clay loam.  Content of coarse fragments of sandstone ranges from 0 to 30 percent by volume.  About 0 to 10 percent by volume is less than 76 mm in diameter and 0 to 20 percent by volume is more than 76 mm in diameter.  Reaction is medium acid to mildly alkaline.

Some pedons have a A2 horizon from 1 to 4 inches thick.  The A2 horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 2 to 4.  Texture and content of coarse fragments are similar to the
A1 horizon.  Reaction is strongly acid to neutral.

The B2t horizon has hue of 5YR to 2.5Y, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 2 to 6.  Mottles are in shades of red, brown, gray, or yellow.  Texture is clay, silty clay, silty clay loam, shaly clay, shaly silty clay, or shaly silty clay loam.  Content of coarse fragments of shale ranges from 0 to 30 percent by volume and are less than 76 mm in diameter.  Reaction is strongly acid to neutral.

The B3 horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 1 or 2.  Mottles are in shades of brown, red, or gray.  Texture is shaly clay, shaly silty clay, shaly silty clay loam, very shaly clay, very shaly silty clay, or very shaly silty clay loam.  Content of coarse fragments of shale ranges from 20 to 50 percent by volume and are less than 76 mm in diameter.  Reaction is medium acid to mildly alkaline.

The Cr horizon has hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of l to 4.  It is shale bedrock that is tilted more than 20 degrees from horizontal.  Reaction is slightly acid to moderately alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other series in this family.  Soils in similar families are the Barden, Bub, Bushnell, Homa, Liberal, Talihina, Tupelo, and Wister series.  Barden, Bushnell, Homa, Liberal, Tupelo, and Wister soils have sola more than 20 inches thick.  In addition, Barden and Liberal soils have Ap or A1 horizons of moist color values less than 4 in the upper 7 inches after mixing and lack abrupt textural changes between the A and B horizons.  Bushnell soils have hyperthermic temperature regimes and Homa soils have more than 60 percent clay in the control section.  Bub soils lack wetness mottles.  Talihina soils lack Bt horizons and have mollic epipedons.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  These are very gently sloping through moderately steep soils on uplands.  Slope gradients range from 1 to 20 percent.  The soil formed in material weathered from shale.  The climate is moist subhumid or humid.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 60 degrees to 64   degrees F., average annual precipitation ranges from 40 to 50 inches, and Thornthwaite annual P-E indices range from 64 to 80.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Wister series and the Clebit, Counts, and Sobol series.  Clebit soils lack B2t horizons and are on similar areas.  Counts and Wister soils are on slightly lower areas in broad valleys.  Counts and Sobol soils have sola more than 20 inches thick.  Sobol soils are on similar areas.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Tuskahoma soils are moderately well drained.  Runoff is medium to rapid and permeability is very slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly for rangeland.  Some of the less sloping and less stony areas are cultivated or used for tame pasture.  Vegetation consists of an open canopy of winged elm, post oak, blackjack oak, and cedar trees with an understory of grasses, legumes, and forbs.  Bahiagrass, tall,  fescue, and improved bermudagrass are the main tame pasture plants.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Broad valleys of the Ouachita Mountains of southeast Oklahoma and possibly western Arkansas.  The series is
of moderate extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Pushmataha County, Oklahoma; 1977.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
