LOCATION DEANN                  AR

Established Series
JEH:GDL:EPM
09/2016

DEANN SERIES

The Deann series consists of very deep, moderately well drained, clayey soils which formed in  clayey marine sediments overlying chalk and/or marl.  These soils are on level to gently rolling  broad interfluves, with slopes of 0 to 8 percent slopes in MLRA 135B Cretaceous Western Coastal Plain.  Mean annual tempertature is 60 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is 48 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Very-fine, smectitic, thermic Oxyaquic Hapluderts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Deann clay, 0 to 8 percent slopes. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

 Ap--0 to 7 inches; very dark gray (5Y 3/1) clay; moderate medium granular structure; very firm; sticky and plastic; many medium and fine roots; few fine pores; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.

 A--7 to 22 inches; dark olive gray (5Y 3/2) clay; moderate medium angular blocky structure; very firm; sticky and plastic; many fine roots; few fine pores; common fine distinct olive (5Y 5/3) iron depletions; common intersecting slickensides; many pressure faces;  few medium calcium carbonate concretions; slightly alkaline; abrupt irregular boundary.

 Bssk1--22 to 52 inches; olive (5Y 5/3) clay; moderate medium angular blocky structure; very firm; sticky and plastic; common wedges of dark olive gray (5Y 3/2) from A horizon; common intersecting slickensides; many shiny pressure faces; few fine roots; few fine pores; many medium and coarse calcium carbonate concretions; moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.

 Bssk2--52 to 64 inches; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/6) clay; moderate medium angular blocky structure; very firm; sticky and plastic; few fine roots; few fine pores; common fine distinct gray (10YR 5/1) iron depletions; few wedges of dark olive gray (5Y 3/2) clay from A horizon; common intersecting slickensides; many shiny pressure faces; few medium calcium carbonate concretions; moderately alkaline; calcareous; gradual wavy boundary.

 C--64 to 80 inches; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/6) clay; massive; very firm; sticky and plastic; few fine roots; few fine pores; common coarse distinct gray (10YR 5/1) iron depletions; few wedges of dark olive gray (5Y 3/2) clay from A horizon; many shiny pressure faces; few intersecting slickensides; few cayfish holes; few medium calcium carbonate concretions; slightly alkaline; calcareous.

TYPE LOCATION:  Hempstead County, Arkansas; NW 1/4, NE 1/4, NE 1/4, Sec, 6, T.12S. R.24W. in a moist pasture area; USGS Hope quadrangle, latitude 33 degrees 44 minutes, 30 seconds N., longitude 93 degrees 37 minutes 23 seconds W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Depth to bedrock ranges from 4 to 9 feet. The soil is clay throughout, ranging from 60 to 80 percent with 60 to 70 percent being most common. Common or many intersecting slickensides are in the AC and C horizons. These are cyclic soils, with cycles of microknolls and microbasins repeated
at linear intervals of 6 to 12 feet. The amplitude of waviness of the boundary between the A and AC horizon ranges from about 9 to 26 inches. The A horizon ranges from slightly acid through mildly alkaline. Few, common,or many calcium carbonate concretions occur in the Bss and C horizons.

Ap or A horizon
Hue:  10YR, 2.5Y, or 5Y
Value:  2 or 3
chroma:  1 or 2
Texture: clay
Reaction: slightly acid through moderately alkaline

Bssk horizon
Hue of 10YR, 2.5Y, or 5Y
Value of 4 or 5
Chroma of 2 or 3
Texture:  clay
Reaction: slightly acid through moderately alkaline

C horizon, when present
Hue:  10YR, 2.5Y, or 5Y
Value:  4 or 5
Chroma: 3 through 6.
Texture: clay
Redoximorphic features: shades of brown, yellow or gray
Reaction:  neutral to moderately alkaline
Chalk bedrock is commonly light gray or pale yellow in color

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Garner, Hollywood, Houston, Kaman, Maytag, Moreland, Okalona, and Zilaboy series.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Deann soils are on broad interfluves between small streams and drainageways.  The parent material consists of clayey marine sediments overlying chalk and/or marl.  Slopes range from 0 to 8 percent. The mean annual tempertature is 60 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is 48 inches. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Laneburg, Sumter, 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained.  Runoff is high.  Permeability is is low.  The saturated hydraulic conductivity is low.  

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are in pasture.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Western Cretaceous Coastal Plain (MLRA 135B) areas of Arkansas and possibly Oklahoma.  The series is of minor extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES PROPOSED:  Hempstead County, Arkansas, 2005

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 22 inches
Cambic horizon - the zone from 22 to a depth of 64 inches
Slickensides - occur within the zone from 7 to a depth of 80 inches

2016 Update was to change status to Established

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
