LOCATION DEBUTE                 LA

Established Series
Rev. WLC
04/2003

DEBUTE SERIES

The Debute series consists of deep moderately well drained,
slowly permeable soils that formed in a thin mantle of loess over loamy Southern Coastal Plains sediments.  These soils are on
nearly level to sloping late Pleistocene age terraces.  Slopes
range from 1 to 8 percent.  Water runs off the surface at a medium
to rapid rate.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, semiactive, thermic Typic Fragiudults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Debute silt loam, on a convex ridge, north
aspect of a 5 percent slope, in pine woodland.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
stated.)

     A11--0 to 2 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) silt loam; weak
medium subangular blocky structure; very friable; common fine
roots; common black stains on faces of peds; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 5 inches thick)

     A12--2 to 8 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) silt loam; common medium distinct dark brown (7.5YR 4/4) mottles; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common very fine and medium roots and few very coarse roots; strongly acid; clear wavy
boundary.  (0 to 8 inches thick)

     B21t--8 to 18 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common very fine,
medium and coarse roots; common thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; few fine black concretions; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

     B22t--18 to 27 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) silty clay
loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; about 70
percent of the horizontal cross section is friable and about 30 percent firm and brittle; common very fine, fine and medium roots; common thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; few medium soft
brown masses; common black stains on faces of peds; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the B2t horizon is
13 to 33 inches)

     IIBx1--27 to 37 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) silt loam,
light brown (7.5YR 6/4) between prisms; moderate very coarse
prisms that part to weak medium subangular blocky structure; about
70 percent of mass is firm and brittle and about 30 percent is friable; common fine and medium roots between prisms; common very fine pores; common distinct clay films on faces of peds and in
pores; common black stains on faces of peds; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

     IIBx2--37 to 53 inches; reddish brown (2.5YR 4/4) loam;
common medium prominent light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) streaks, pockets, and coatings between prisms; very coarse moderate prisms that part to weak medium subangular blocky structure; about 70 percent of mass is firm and brittle and about 30 percent friable; common fine roots between peds; distinct clay films on faces of
peds; common black stains on faces of peds; very strongly acid;
clear wavy boundary.

     IIBx3--53 to 70 inches; red (2.5YR 4/6) loam; few light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) fine sandy loam streaks and coatings around peds; moderate coarse subangular blocky structure; about 50 percent of horizontal cross section is firm and brittle and about
50 percent friable; few medium roots between prisms; common
distinct clay films on faces of peds; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bx horizon 14 to 60 inches)

     IIB23t--70 to 90 inches; red (2.5YR 4/6) sandy clay loam;
common prominent light gray (10YR 6/1) mottles; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; about 80 percent of mass is friable
and about 20 percent is firm and brittle; thin patchy clay films
on faces of peds and in pores; light gray (10YR 7/1) fine sandy
loam and very firm sandy loam between peds; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Morehouse Parish, Louisiana; about 8 miles north
of Bastrop; 308 steps (974 feet) south of Pratt Brake, 0.9 mile
north of Georgia-Pacific gravel road, 12 steps (36 feet) east of steep bank of AL&M Railroad in the SE1/4NE1/4, sec. 7, T. 22 N.,
R. 6 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from about 50 to over 100 inches.  Depth to fragipan ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Reaction, except for surface layers that have been limed, ranges
from medium acid to very strongly acid throughout the solum.  Thickness of the loess ranges from 20 to 40 inches.

The A horizons have hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 3 to 5, and
chroma of 2 to 4.  Where the value is 3 and chroma is 2 or 3 the A horizon is less than 8 inches thick.

The Bt horizons have hue of 5YR or 2.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and
chroma of 4 to 8.  Mottles are in shades of yellow and brown.  Texture is silt loam or silty clay loam.

The IIBx and IIBt horizons have hue of 5YR or 2.5YR, value of 4 or
5, and chroma of 4 to 6.  Mottles are in shades of gray, yellow,
and brown.  Texture is silt loam, loam, or sandy clay loam.

COMPETING SERIES:  There is no other series in the same family.  Bussy, Gigger, Libuse, Loring, Providence, and Shatta series are
in similar families.  Bussy and Libuse soils have high base saturation in lower B horizon and siliceous sand mineralogy.
Gigger, Providence, and Loring soils have high base saturation in lower B horizon.  Shatta soils have Bt horizons with hue of 10YR
or 7.5YR, and siliceous sand mineralogy.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Debute soils are on nearly level to sloping terraces.  Slope gradients range from 1 to 8 percent.  The soil formed in a thin mantle of loess over loamy coastal plains
sediments.  The climate is warm and humid.  The mean annual precipitation is about 50 inches and the mean annual temperature
is about 66 degrees F near the type location.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Libuse series and the Frizzell and Guyton series.  Frizzell soils are on level areas and the subsoil is yellowish brown with gray mottles.  Guyton soils are in concave areas and along drainageways and have
a gray subsoil.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Debute soils are moderately well
drained.  Runoff is medium to rapid.  Permeability is moderate in
the upper part of the B horizon and slow in the fragipan.  A water table is perched above the fragipan for short periods December through March.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are in woodland.  Some areas are
in crops and pasture.  Wooded areas are in pine, oak, and
sweetgum.  The main crops are cotton, soybeans, and truck crops.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Louisiana and possibly Arkansas.  The series is not extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Morehouse Parish, Louisiana; 1981.

                 National Cooperative Soil Survey
                             U. S. A.


