LOCATION DELAND                 FL

Established Series
Rev. RBH; AGH; GRB
10/2003

DELAND SERIES

The Deland series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils on low, broad, sand hills.  They formed in thick beds of marine, eolian, or fluvial sediments on the lower Coastal Plain.  Near the type location, the mean annual temperature is about 72 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 55 inches.  Slopes range from 0 to 8 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy, siliceous, hyperthermic Entic Grossarenic Alorthods

TYPICAL PEDON:  Deland fine sand on a 0 to 5 percent slope.  (Colors are for moist soil.)

    A--0 to 4 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) rubbed, fine sand; single grained; loose; common fine roots; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (2 to 7 inches thick)

    E1--4 to 10 inches; light gray (10YR 7/1) fine sand; single grained; loose; few fine and medium roots; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary.

    E2--10 to 19 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) fine sand; single grained; loose; few fine roots; splotches and streaks of brown (7.5YR 4/4) and dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) accumulations mostly along root channels; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary.

    E3--19 to 36 inches; gray (10YR 6/1) fine sand; single grained; loose; common medium roots; few brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) stains along old root channels; few fine distinct dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) masses of accumulations; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

    E4--36 to 55 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) fine sand; single grained; loose; common dead roots and root channels; streaks of yellow (10YR 7/6) stains along root channels; few fine faint light gray (10YR 7/1) bodies of uncoated sand grains; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the E horizons ranges from 40 to 72 inches)

    Bh1--55 to 67 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) fine sand; single grained; loose; few medium dead roots and root channels; few distinct yellowish red (5YR 5/8) stains along old root channels; common uncoated sand grains; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary.  

    Bh2--67 to 78 inches; black (10YR 2/1) fine sand; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; remnant of an old stump with many dead roots; many sand grains coated with colloidal organic matter; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary. 

    Bh3--78 to 94 inches; black (10YR 2/1) fine sand; massive; noncemented; sand grains well coated with colloidal organic matter; very strongly acid; gradual irregular boundary. 

    Bh4--94 to 130 inches; black (10YR 2/1) fine sand; massive; strongly cemented; sand grains well coated with colloidal organic matter; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Volusia County, Florida; on Rima Ridge off Indian Lake Road about 0.75 mile southeast of Scoggins Lake and about 100 yards southeast of corner of Old Clark Field.  SW 1/4, SW 1/4, Sec. 24, R. 31 E., T. 15 S.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness is more than 80 inches.  Depth to the Bh horizon ranges from 50 to 75 inches.  Reaction ranges from very strongly acid to slightly acid in the A and E horizons, very strongly acid to moderately acid in the BE horizon, and extremely acid to strongly acid in the Bh horizon.  
The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma 1 or 2; or it is neutral (N) with value of 2 to 4.  Texture is Texture is fine sand or sand throughout the solum.
 
The upper part of the E horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 1 to 4.  Texture is fine sand or sand throughout the solum.

The lower part of the E horizon has the same range of colors as the upper part.  Fine to coarse bodies or discontinuous streaks in shades of gray or white range from few to common but are not considered indicative of wetness; they are the color of the sand grains.  Accumulations (oxides) in shades of red, yellow, brown, or gray range from few to common, mostly along old root channels.

The BEh horizon, where present, has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Few to common uncoated sand grains are in this horizon.  Texture is fine sand or sand throughout the solum.

The Bh horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 1 or 4; or it is neutral with value of 2.  It is moderately to strongly cemented below a depth of 80 inches.  Few to common uncoated sand grains are in the Bh horizon but sand grains are well coated with colloidal organic matter in the lower part of the Bh horizon.  Texture is fine sand or sand throughout the solum.

COMPETING SERIES:  The Duette and Hobe series are in the same family.  The moderately well drained Duette soils are on similar to lower positions.  The somewhat excessively drained Hobe soils are on similar positions in the flatwoods and have an argillic horizon within an 80 inch depth under the spodic horizons.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Deland soils are on sand hills on the low Coastal Plains in central Florida.  Slopes range from 0 to 8 percent.  They formed in thick beds of marine, eolian, or fluvial sediments.  The climate is humid subtropical.  The average annual precipitation ranges from about 50 to 60 inches and the average annual air temperature ranges from 70 to 74 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Astatula, Cassia, Immokalee, Pomello, Paola, and Tavares series.  The excessively drained Astatula and Paola soils are on higher positions and are sandy throughout.  In addition, Paola soils have weakly expressed Spodic horizons.  The somewhat poorly drained Cassia soils are on lower positions and have Bh horizons within a depth of 30 inches.  Immokalee and Pomello soils are on lower positions and have Bh horizons within depths of 30 to 50 inches.  In addition, Immokalee soils are poorly drained and Pomello soils are somewhat poorly to moderately well drained.  The moderately well drained Tavares soils are on lower positions and are sandy throughout.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; rapid and very rapid permeability in the A and E horizons, moderately rapid in the BE horizon, and moderate in the Bh horizon above a depth of 80 inches.  The moderately to strongly cemented part of the Bh horizon below 80 inches has slow or very slow permeability.
 
USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are in native vegetation and are used for wildlife habitat.  Some areas are used for citrus or improved pasture.  Also, some areas are used for homes with relatively large lots.  The natural vegetation is dominated by sand live oak, turkey oak, along with scattered sawpalmetto, and clumps of pineland threeawn, prickly pear, and broomsedge bluestem.
  
DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Central Peninsular Florida.  The series is of small known extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Auburn, Alabama.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Volusia County, Florida; 1977.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:

Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to a depth of 55 inches (the A, E1, E2, E3, and E4 horizons).

Spodic horizon - the zone from a depth of 55 inches to a depth of more than 130 inches (the Bh1, Bh2, Bh3, and Bh4 horizons).

The water table is below depths of 72 inches; however, there is a perched water table on the strongly cemented layers below depths of 80 inches in the spodic horizon.  The water table fluctuates between depths of about 75 to 90 inches during periods of high rainfall

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Data is available on a pedon sampled with number S76FL127-28(1-9).  Characterization data was obtained from the University of Florida and engineering test data from the Florida Department of Transportation.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
