LOCATION DENAUD                 FL

Established Series
DAD; GRB
02/2006

DENAUD SERIES

The Denaud series consists of very deep, very poorly drained, moderately permeable soils with a thin organic layer over sandy and loamy material in depressions on the fringes of the Everglades.  They formed in sandy and loamy marine sediments.  Near the type location, the mean annual temperature is about 73 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 54 inches.  Slopes are less than 2 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Coarse-loamy, siliceous, superactive, nonacid, hyperthermic Histic Humaquepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Denaud muck (Colors are for moist soil).

     Oa--0 to 11 inches; black (10YR 2/1) muck; weak subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine roots; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (9 to 15 inches thick)

     A--11 to 20 inches; black (10YR 2/1) fine sand; single grained; loose; few fine roots; slightly alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.  (6 to 16 inches thick)

     AC--20 to 23 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) fine sand; single grained; loose; few fine roots; slightly alkaline; clear wavy boundary.  (0 to 12 inches thick)

     Cg--23 to 42 inches; gray (10YR 5/1) fine sandy loam; weak subangular blocky structure; friable; common distinct soft masses of calcium carbonate; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; clear wavy boundary.  (5 to 30 inches thick)

     2Cg--42 to 80 inches; gray (10YR 6/1) gravelly fine sand; massive; moderately alkaline; common distinct soft masses of calcium carbonate; about 15 percent, by volume, calcareous pebbles; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Hendry County, Florida.  Approximately 0.53 mile south of Route 833 and 1.70 miles west of Route 833.  SE 1/4, NE 1/4, Sec. 29, T. 46 S., R. 33 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Reaction ranges from moderately acid to moderately alkaline in the Oa, A, and AC horizons and from slightly acid to moderately alkaline in the Cg and 2Cg horizons.  Some pedons may contain fragmented, discontinuous limestone or cemented carbonates at a depth of 40 inches or more.

The Oa horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 2, and chroma of 1.  Mineral content ranges up to 70 percent.  Texture is muck.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 1 or 2; or it is neutral with value of 2 or 3.  Organic matter content ranges up to 20 percent.  Texture is sand, fine sand, loamy fine sand, or their mucky analogues.

The AC horizon, where present, has hue of 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 1 to 3.  Texture is sand or fine sand.

The Cg horizon has hue of 10YR to 5B, value of 4 to 7, and chroma of 1 to 3. Soft masses of calcium carbonate range from none to common.  Texture ranges from loamy fine sand to sandy clay loam.
  
The 2Cg horizon, where present, has hue of 10YR to 5B, value of 4 to 8, and chroma of 1 to 3.  Content of cemented carbonates or ironstone nodules 2 to 10mm in size range up to 20 percent, by volume.  Texture ranges from fine sand to sandy clay loam or gravelly fine sand to gravelly sandy loam with or without sand-size shell fragments and cemented carbonates.  

The 3Cg horizon, where present, has hue of 5Y to 5B, value of 4 to 7, and chroma of 1. Texture is sand or fine sand.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other known series in the same family.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Denaud soils occur in depressions on the fringes of the Everglades.  Slopes are less than 2 percent.  They formed in sandy and loamy marine sediments.  The climate is humid subtropical.  The average annual soil temperature ranges from 72 to 74 degrees F., and the average annual rainfall ranges from 50 to 59 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the Basinger, Chobee, Delray, Gator, Gentry, Holopaw, Pineda, Riviera, and Winder soils.  With the exception of Gator, these soils lack an organic surface layer 8 or more inches thick.  The very poorly drained or poorly drained Basinger soils are on similar to slightly higher positions and have a weakly expressed Spodic horizon.  Chobee soils are on similar positions, have fine-loamy control sections, and are Mollisols.  Delray soils are on similar positions, have sandy surface and subsurface layers 40 to 80 inches thick, and are Mollisols.  Gator soils are on similar positions, and are Histosols, having muck layers greater than 16 inches in thickness.  Gentry soils are on similar positions, have sandy surface and subsurface layers 20 to 40 inches thick, and are Mollisols.  The very poorly or poorly drained Holopaw soils are on similar to slightly higher positions and have sandy surface and subsurface layers 40 to 80 inches thick.  The very poorly or poorly drained Pineda soils are on similar to slightly higher positions and have sandy surface and subsurface layers 20 to 40 inches thick.  The poorly drained Riviera soils are on similar to slightly higher positions and have sandy surface and subsurface layers 20 to 40 inches thick.  The poorly drained Winder soils are on similar to slightly higher positions and have fine-loamy control sections.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Very poorly drained; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of Denaud soils are in improved pasture or native range.  The natural vegetation includes blue maidencane, sawgrass, fireflags, pickerelweek, black willow, and baldcypress.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Central and southern Florida.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Auburn, Alabama.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Hendry County, Florida; 1983.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:

Histic epipedon - the zone from 0 to 11 inches (Oa horizon).

Mollic epipedon - the zone from 11 o 20 inches (A horizon).

Under natural conditions these soils are ponded for 6 to 9 months and are saturated to the surface the rest of the time during most years.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
