LOCATION DEPERE                 WI

Established Series
Revised Staff
03/2025

DEPERE SERIES

The DePere series consists of well drained and moderately well drained, fine-textured soils that formed in alluvium washed mainly from red clay in glacial drift areas. These soils are on flood plains of principal streams. Slope ranges from 0 to 3 percent. Mean annual temperature is about 47 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is about 29 inches. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, active, nonacid, mesic Typic Udifluvents

TYPICAL PEDON: DePere silty clay loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes, in an uncultivated field. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.) 

 A--0 to 9 inches; black (10YR 2/1) silty clay loam; moderate, fine, granular structure; friable; mildly alkaline; gradual, wavy boundary. 

 C1--9 to 19 inches; dark reddish-brown (5YR 3/3) silty clay; moderate, fine, angular blocky structure; firm; moderately alkaline; gradual, wavy boundary. 

 C2--19 to 43 inches; dark reddish-brown (5YR 3/4) silty clay; moderate, medium, angular blocky structure; very firm; moderately alkaline; calcareous; clear, wavy boundary. 

 C3--43 to 48 inches; reddish-brown (5YR 4/3) silty clay; common, fine, prominent mottles of yellowish red (5YR 5/6); weak, fine, subangular blocky structure; very firm; 1- to 6-inch layer contains numerous snail shells and small clam shells, 2 to 15 millimeters in size; strongly alkaline; calcareous; clear, wavy boundary. 

 C4--48 to 60 inches; reddish-brown (2.5YR 4/4) silty clay; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; very firm; few limestone fragments, mostly less than 20 millimeters in diameter; strongly alkaline; calcareous. 

TYPE LOCATION: Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin; NW 1/4 SE 1/4 sec 33, T. 15 N., R. 17 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Horizonation is moderate to weak. 

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 2, and chroma of 1. Texture is silty clay loam. Reaction is mildly alkaline. 

The C horizon has hue of 2.5YR or 5YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 3 or 4. Texture is typically silty clay although there can be a wide range of textures below a depth of 30 inches. Some pedons have layers of sand, gravel, or cobblestones. These coarse layers contain numerous shells of snails and small clams. Other pedons are silty clay loam to depths of 48 to 60 inches. Reaction is moderately or strongly alkaline.  

COMPETING SERIES: There are no other series in this family.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: DePere soils are on flood plains of principal streams. Slope ranges from 0 to 3 percent. The soils formed in alluvium washed mainly from red clay in glacial drift areas. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These include the poorly drained Poygan soils, the somewhat poorly drained Manawa soils, and the moderately well drained Peebles soils formed in clayey till.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained and moderately well drained. Permeability is moderately slow. A seasonal high water table is less than 1 foot below the surface. These soils are subject to occasional flooding during periods of high water in the spring and after periods of heavy rainfall.

USE AND VEGETATION: Most areas of DePere soils are used for pasture. Bluegrass is the common pasture forage plant. In a few areas, where drainage has been improved or protected from flooding, the soils are cropped for corn or oats. Native vegetation is shrubs and trees, such as elm and thornapple. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Eastern Wisconsin in MLRA 95B. The soils of this series are not extensive. 

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Salina, Kansas 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin, 1967. 

REMARKS: There is limited historical documentation available for DePere Series other than what is published in the Soil Survey of Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin (1973). Soil names for this survey were approved in 1967. The 1967 Taxonomic Class was Fine, mixed, nonacid, mesic Typic Udifluvents. 

The DePere Series is presently correlated in Fond du Lac County. There is no record of when this series was made inactive.  With this 03/2025 revision, DePere series is now reactivated until field investigations are conducted to evaluate the range in properties, in particular the depth to the seasonal high water table, and the extent.

The Wisconsin NRCS State Office requested that null or missing OSD information be populated in the OSD Database so it can be accessed for reference. These references are critical for NRI sampling verification, program eligibility for onsite, and compliance review and checks. There was no OSD available in the OSD Database for DePere Series. 

This OSD is based on data available in the Soil Survey of Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin (1973) and in NASIS data mapunits (Rec IDs 269645 and 269673). 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
