LOCATION DOCENA                 AL+GA

Established Series
Rev. LDS:HBN
04/2007

DOCENA SERIES

The Docena series consists of deep, moderately well drained soils that formed in alluvial, colluvial, and shaly residual sediments
on low areas of the Appalachian Plateau.  Slopes range from 0 to 6 percent.  The seasonal water table is within 1.5 to 3 feet of the surface.  Mean annual precipitation is about 53 inches and mean annual temperature is about 62 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, siliceous, subactive, thermic Aquic Hapludults

TypicalPedon:  Docena silt loam--on a south facing concave 4
percent slope in a pasture at 530 feet elevation.
(Colors are for moist soil.)

     A1--0 to 4 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable; many fine and medium roots; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (3 to 7 inches thick)

     B21t--4 to 26 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) silt loam;
few medium distinct light brownish gray (10YR  6/2) mottles; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine
and few medium roots; common fine and medium pores; thin
discontinous clay films on faces of peds; light brownish gray
mottles are in the lower part; very strongly acid; diffuse wavy boundary.

     B22t--26 to 40 inches; mottled brownish yellow (10YR 6/6),
light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) and light gray (10YR 7/2) silt
loam; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; friable;
few fine roots; common fine pores; thin discontinous clay films on faces of peds; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.
(Combined thickness of the B21t and B22t horizons is 25 to 55 inches.)

     IIB23t--40 to 58 inches; mottled brownish yellow (10YR 6/6), gray (10YR 6/1) and reddish yellow (7.5YR 6/8) silty clay loam; moderate coarse and medium subangular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots; common fine pores; thick continuous clay films on
faces of peds; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (0 to 35
inches thick)

     IIC--58 to 65 inches; mottled brownish yellow (10YR 6/6),
gray (10YR 6/1) and reddish yellow (7.5YR 6/8) silty clay loam; massive; firm; strongly acid.

TypeLocation:  Jefferson County, Alabama; 3.0 miles east of
Bessemer, 1,000 feet east and 1,900 feet south of the NW corner of Sec. 25, T. 19 S., R.4  W.

RangeinCharacteristics:  Solum thickness is 40 to 60 inches.
Depth to weathered shale or sandstone is more than 60 inches.  Reaction ranges from medium acid to very strongly acid except
where the surface layer has been limed.  Many pedons contain black
or brown, manganese and iron concretions and accumulations.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 2 through 4.  The thickness of A horizons with values of
3, is less than 6 inches.  Texture is generally silt loam, but the range includes loam and fine sandy loam.

The B1 or A2 horizon, where present, is silt loam or loam.  These horizons have hue of 7.5YR through 2.5Y, value of 5 or 6, and
chroma of 4 or 6.

The upper B2t horizon has hue of 10YR and 7.5YR, value of 4
through 6, and chroma of 4 through 8, with mottles of chroma 2 or less in the upper 24 inches.  Texture is silt loam or silty clay loam.  The lower B2t horizon is mottled in shades of red, brown, yellow, and gray or it has the same hue, value, and chroma as the upper B2t horizon with common to many mottles of chroma 2 or less.

The IIBt horizon, where present, formed in residual shale and has silty clay or silty clay loam texture, or it formed in alluvial sediments and has loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, or silt loam texture and is slightly brittle in less than 40 percent of the
mass.  Horizons with these characteristics are more than 30 inches below the surface.

The C horizon material is variable in texture and color but is
slowly permeable.  It is highly weathered shale, or firm
@underclay@ which may contain layers of soft coal, or alluvial or colluvial sediments that contain few to many gravels and
concretions.

CompetingSeries:  There are no other known series in this family.  The Abell, Altavista, Kirksey, and
Whitwell series are similar soils in related families.  Abell, Altavista, and Whitwell soils are fine-loamy. Kirksey soils have siliceous mineralogy and slate bedrock at 40 to 60 inches.

GeographicGEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Docena soils are on nearly level to gent sloping depressions, toeslopes, heads of drainageways, and high stream flood plains of the Appalachian Plateau and upland flats in limestone valleys. These soils formed in alluvial or colluvial sediments or in thin alluvial or colluvial sediments overlying material weathered from residual shale, locally known as
@underclay.@  Slope is commonly 0 to 4 percent but ranges to 6 percent.

GeographicallyAssociatedSoils:  These are Albertville,
Choccolocco, Holston, Montevallo, Nauvoo, State, and Townley
series.  Albertville, Holston, Montevallo, Nauvoo, and Townley
soils are on uplands.  In addition, Albertville and Townley soils have clayey subsoils and shale bedrock within 60 inches of the surface, Holston and Nauvoo soils have fine-loamy subsoils, and Montevallo soils have shale bedrock within 20 inches of the
surface.  Choccolocco and State soils are on similar landscapes,
but lack mottles of chroma 2 or less within the upper 24 inches of the argillic horizon.

DrainageandPermeability:  Moderately well drained.  Permeability
is moderate in the upper part of the sola and slow to moderately
slow in the lower B2t and C horizons.  A seasonal water table is within 1.5 to 3 feet during the winter and early spring.  Water
moves laterally through the soil and substratum immediately
beneath the soil.  Runoff is slow to medium.  Docena soils are subject to occasional shallow flooding for very brief periods.

UseandVegetation:  Most of the Docena soils have been cleared and cropped in the past.  At present most of these soils are used for pasture.  Native vegetation includes oaks, yellow-poplar,
hickories, shortleaf and loblolly pine.

DistributionandExtent:  Appalachian Plateau of Alabama.  Possibly
in Georgia and Tennessee.  The series is of small extent.

SeriesEstablished:  Jefferson County, Alabama, 1980.

REMARKS:  Docena soils were formerly included in the Altavista and Leadvale series.

AdditionalData:  Auburn University Laboratory - Jefferson County, Alabama, S-78-A1-73-27.

          National Cooperative Soil Survey
          U. S. A.


