LOCATION DUANE                  NY+ME NH VT

Established Series
Rev. DFR-LWK
12/2021

DUANE SERIES

The Duane series is a member of the sandy-skeletal, mixed, frigid, ortstein family of Typic Haplorthods.  Typically Duane soils have thin black 02 and A1 horizons, reddish gray and dark reddish gray very gravelly sand A2 horizons, dark reddish gray weakly cemented very gravelly sand B21h horizons and dark reddish brown firm very gravelly sand B22ir horizons over grayish brown loose very gravelly sand C horizons.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy-skeletal, mixed, frigid, ortstein Typic Haplorthods

TYPICAL PEDON:  Duane very gravelly - wooded (Colors are for moist soils.)

 Oe--0 to 1 inch; black (10YR 2/1) decomposed organic material; many fine roots; extremely acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (1 to 4 inches thick)

 A--1 to 2 inches; black (5YR 2/1) very gravelly loamy sand; moderate fine granular structure; very friable; many fine and medium roots; porous; 40 percent gravel; extremely acid; abrupt wavy boundary. (1 to 4 inches thick)

 E1--2 to 15 inches; reddish gray (5YR 5/2) very gravelly sand; moderate fine granular structure; very friable; common fine and medium roots; porous; 45 percent gravel; extremely acid; clear wavy boundary. (2 to 15 inches thick)

 E2--15 to 18 inches; dark reddish gray (5YR 4/2) very gravelly sand; weak medium granular structure; very friable; common fine and medium roots; porous; 45 percent coarse fragments; extremely acid; clear broken boundary. (0 to 5 inches thick)

 Bh--18 to 26 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/2) very gravelly sand; massive; friable between cemented bodies which are very firm; common medium and large pores; dominantly (60 percent) weakly cemented; 65 percent pebbles and cobble-stones; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (3 to 10 inches thick)

 Bs--26 to 39 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) very gravelly sand; common medium faint dark reddish brown (2.5YR 3/4) mottles; massive; firm; common medium and large pores; 65 percent pebbles and cobblestones; strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary. (8 to 15 inches thick)

 C--39 to 53 inches; grayish brown (2.5YR 5/2) very gravelly sand; single grain; loose; 60 percent pebbles and cobblestones; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Oswego County, New York, Town of Constantia; 1.7 miles north of Bernhards Bay, 150 feet east of County Route 17.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Coarse fragments range from none to 50 percent in the upper parts of the solum and form 40 to 70 percent in the lower parts of the solum and in the substratum.  In some pedons subhorizons of loamy sand or sand free of coarse fragments occur in the control section.

The A1 horizons have hues of 5YR through 10YR or are neutral, values of 2 or 3, and chroma of 0 to 2.  They are fine sandy loam through loamy sand in the fine earth fraction.  They are very friable or friable.  Some pedons have Ap horizons which have values ranging from 3 to 5 and are similar in other features to the A1 horizons.  The A1 and Ap horizons range from extremely acid to medium acid.

The A2 horizons have hues of 5YR through 10YR, values of 4 to 7 in value and chroma of 1 to 3.  They are loamy fine sand to sand in the fine earth fraction.  They have weak or moderate fine or medium granular structure or they are massive or single grain.  They are loose or very friable.  They are extremely acid to medium acid.

The B2h horizons have hues of 2.5YR through 10YR, and values and chroma of 2 or 3.  They are fine sandy loam through sand in the fine earth fraction.  They are massive and consistence is friable between dominant firm or very firm irregularly shaped cemented bodies.  They range from very strongly to medium acid.

The B2ir horizons have hues of 5YR through 10YR, values of 3 to 6 and chroma of 4 to 8.  They have few to many mottles. They are loamy fine sand to sand in the fine earth fraction. They have weak granular or subangular blocky structure, or the material is structureless.  They are loose to firm. They range from very strongly to medium acid.

The C horizons have hues of 7.5YR through 2.5Y, values of 3 to 5 and chroma of 1 to 3.  They are fine sand or sand in the fine earth fraction.  They range from very strongly to medium acid.

COMPETING SERIES:  The Constable series is the only other series in the same family.  The Colton, Crogham, Fahey, Hermon, Naumburg, Waiska, and Wallace series are similar soils in related families.  Constable soils lack mottles in the lower part of the B2 horizon.  Colton, Fahey, Hermon, and Waiska soils lack Bh horizons that are cemented. Crogham and Naumburg soils are essentially free of coarse fragments and lack B horizons that are cemented.  Wallace soils are essentially free of coarse fragments.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Duane soils are on nearly level and locally low areas of outwash terraces.  Slopes are mainly less than 3 percent in gradient.  The water table fluctuates to within less than two feet of the surface.  The soils formed in glacial outwash sand and gravel derived mainly from sandstone, granite and gneiss.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 38 degrees to 44 degrees F.; mean annual precipitation from 35 to 50 inches; and mean frost-free season from 90 to 130 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Adams, Becket, Colton, Crogham, Harmon, Naumburg and Worth soils.  Adams, Croghan, and Naumburg soils are on adjacent sand plains.
Becket, Hermon, and Worth soils occupy adjacent areas of glacial till.  Colton soils are excessively drained associates.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained.  Runoff is slow; internal drainage is moderate; permeability is moderately rapid.  The water table normally drops to below reach of plant roots with the advent of the growing season.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Some areas have been cleared and are largely reverting to brush, with bracken, blueberry, gray birch and aspen cover.  Some areas remain cropped to grass hay.  Woodlands support sugar maple, yellow birch, hemlock, white pine, red spruce, and balsam fir.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern parts of New York, Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine.  Possibly northern Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota.   The soils are of moderate extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Oxford County, Maine, 1948.

REMARKS:  Soils with distinct or prominent mottles in the spodic horizon are excluded from the series.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
