LOCATION DUCK                   MI

Established Series
JKC-GDW-JFH
06/2007

DUCK SERIES

The Duck series consist of very deep, moderately well drained soils. They formed in a thin, loamy surface layer containing red, hydrous oxide clays over sandy alluvial deposits on stream terraces.  Saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderately high or high in the loamy surface and high or very high in the rest of the soil.  Slopes range from 0 to 6 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 760 millimeters, and mean annual temperature is about 5 degrees C.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Mixed, frigid Oxyaquic Udipsamments

TYPICAL PEDON:  Duck fine sandy loam from an area of Wurtsmith-Duck-Rubicon complex, 0 to 15 percent slopes at an elevation of 225 meters in a forested area.  (Colors are for moist soils unless otherwise stated.)

	Oe--0 to 2 centimeters; partially decomposed forest litter.

	A--2 to 15 centimeters; dark reddish brown (2.5YR 3/3) fine sandy loam, weak red (2.5YR 4/2) dry; weak medium subangular blocky structure; very friable; common fine and medium roots; very strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (2 to 13 centimeters thick)

	2Bw--15 to 38 centimeters; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/6) sand; weak fine subangular blocky structure; very friable; common fine and medium roots; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (0 to 38 centimeters thick)

	2C1--38 to 66 centimeters; brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) sand; single grain; loose; few fine and medium roots; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary. (0 to 51 centimeters thick)

	2C2--66 to 203 centimeters; very pale brown (10YR 7/3) sand; single grain; loose; few fine roots; common fine prominent strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) iron accumulations throughout; about 5 percent gravel; moderately acid.

TYPE LOCATION: Major Land Resource Area 94B  Michigan Eastern Upper Peninsula Sandy Drift, Schoolcraft County Michigan Subset; about 12 miles southeast of Shingleton; 1200 feet south and 2200 feet west of the northeast corner of sec. 36, T. 45 N., R. 16W., USGS Walsh topographic quadrangle; lat. 46 degrees 15 minutes, 21.5 seconds N. and long. 86 degrees 14 minutes 57.1 seconds W.; Hiawatha Township.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 
Gravel content - 0 to 5 percent throughout
Depth to redoximorphic features - 64 to 102 centimeters
Clay content, loamy surface - 7 to 15 percent
 
A horizon:
Hue - 2.5YR to 5YR
Chroma - 2 to 4
Texture - fine sandy loam or sandy loam
Reaction - extremely acid to very strongly acid

2Bw horizon:
Hue - 10YR to 5YR
Value - 3 to 5
Chroma - 3 to 6
Texture - sand or loamy sand
Concentrations of bog iron - 0 to 10 percent
Reaction - extremely acid to very strongly acid

2C horizon:
Value - 5 to 7
Chroma - 3 to 8
Texture - sand or fine sand
Reaction - extremely acid to slightly acid

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Crex, Lenroot, Mooers, Pelkie, Seulchoix (tentative), Sissabagama, Sunia, Tourtillotte and Wurtsmith series.
None of these soils allow a loamy red surface layer containing 7 to 15 percent hydrous oxide clays.
Crex - average 50 percent or more fine sand in the particle-size control section.
Lenroot - average 15 to 35 percent gravel in the control section.
Mooers - have greater than 50 percent fine sand and very fine sand in the lower part of the series control section.
Pelkie - have an irregular decrease in organic carbon with depth.
Seulchoix  Data to compete Seulchoix is not yet available (June 2007).
Sissabagama and Tourtillotte - have greater than 15 percent combined silt and clay below 102 centimeters.
Sunia - have a Bw horizon with greater than 15 percent combined silt and clay and up to 15 percent gravel in the underlying sandy outwash.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Parent Material - sandy alluvium
Landform - stream terraces
Slope - 0 to 6 percent
Mean annual precipitation - 710 to 810 millimeters
Mean annual air temperature - 3 to 5 degrees C.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Deford, Hiawatha, Halfaday, Rubicon, Seney, and Wurtsmith soils.
Deford  are in depressions and in the Typic Psammaquents subgroup.
Halfaday - are on low knolls and ridges and in the Oxyaquic Haplorthods subgroup.
Seney  are in slightly lower landscape positions and in the Typic Psammaquents subgroup.
Hiawatha - are on slightly higher landscape positions and in the Typic Udipsamments subgroup.
Rubicon - are on ridges and knolls and in the Entic Haplorthods subgroup.
Wurtsmith - are on low knolls and ridges.

DRAINAGE AND SATURATED HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY:
Drainage - are water saturated from 64 to 102 centimeters below the surface in October, November, March, April, May, and June (moderately well drained).
Surface runoff - very low.
Saturated hydraulic conductivity - moderately high or high in the loamy surface and high or very high in the rest of the soil
Flooding frequency - occasional

USE AND VEGETATION: Most of this soil is forested. Major tree species are red maple, sugar maple, American beech, red pine, and white pine. Common ground plants include shield fern, wild-lily-of- the-valley, bunchberry, low sweet blueberry, starflower, and bracken fern.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Physiographic Division
--Interior Plains
Physiographic Province
--Central Lowland
Physiographic Section
--Eastern Lake
Land Resource Region
--Northern Lake States Forest and Forage region (LRR K)
Major Land Resource Area
--Michigan Eastern Upper Peninsula Sandy Drift (MLRA 94B)

The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: St. Paul, Minnesota

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Major Land Resource Area 94B  Michigan Eastern Upper Peninsula Sandy Drift; Schoolcraft County Michigan Subset, December 2006.
Proposed in Schoolcraft County, Michigan, 2002. Source of name is a creek in Schoolcraft County, Michigan.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in the typical pedon are: Ochric epipedon - 0 to 15 centimeters (Oe and A horizons)
Water saturation within 100 centimeters of the surface.

ADDITIONAL DATA: The pedon descriptions supporting this series concept are stored in NASIS.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
