LOCATION ADDIELOU               TX

Established Series
Rev. GLL:KR
12/2005

ADDIELOU SERIES

The Addielou series consists of deep, moderately well drained, moderately slowly permeable soils mainly on terraces of the Red River.  The soil formed in acid, loamy alluvium.  Slopes are dominantly 0 to 3 percent but range up to 5 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, semiactive, thermic Typic Paleudults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Addielou fine sandy loam - woodland.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated).

     A--0 to 8 inches; brown (1OYR 5/3) fine sandy loam; weak fine granular structure; slightly hard, very friable; common large
roots; medium acid; gradual smooth boundary. (3 to 10 inches
thick)

      E--8 to 28 inches; light yellowish brown (1OYR 6/4) fine
sandy loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable; few fine roots; few fine and very fine pores; few
worm channels; slightly acid; clear irregular boundary.  (17 to 30 inches thick)

     Bt--28 to 48 inches; yellowish brown (1OYR 5/6) sandy clay
loam, few fine prominent yellowish red (5YR 4/8) mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; few patchy clay films; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (10 to 25
inches thick)

     Bt/E1--48 to 60 inches; mottled yellowish brown (1OYR 5/6),
gray (1OYR 6/1), and yellowish red (5YR 4/8) sandy clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; continuous clay films; vertical streaks and small pockets of light gray (1OYR 7/1) uncoated sand comprising 5 to 10 percent of the volume; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (8 to 15
inches thick)

     Bt/E2--60 to 90 inches; gray (1OYR 6/1) clay; many medium and coarse prominent red (2.5YR 4/8) and few fine distinct yellowish brown mottles; moderate coarse blocky structure; extremely hard, very firm, plastic; continuous clay films; vertical streaks of light gray (1OYR 7/1) clean sand and silt comprising 5 to 10 percent of the volume; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Red River County, Texas; 7 miles north of the courthouse in Clarksville on Texas Highway 27 to county road; east on county road 1 mile; 50 feet south of road in pine plantation.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 60 to about 100 inches.  Base saturation at 50 inches below the top of the
Argillic horizon ranges from 20 to 35 percent.  Thickness of the surface layer ranges from 20 to 36 inches.

The A horizon has hues dominantly of 1OYR, value of 3 to 5 and chroma of 2 to 4.  Where moist values are 3, it is less than 7 inches thick.  Texture is fine sandy loam, very fine sandy loam, or loam.  Reaction ranges from medium acid to neutral.

The E horizon has hue of 7.5YR or IOYR, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 3 to 6.  Texture of the E horizon is very fine sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or loam.  Reaction ranges from strongly acid to slightly acid.

The Bt horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 1OYR, values of 5 or 6, and chroma of 4 to 8.  Mottles in shades of red and gray range from few to common.  Mottles with chroma 2 or less are below a depth of 30 inches.  Texture is sandy clay loam, clay loam, or loam.  The upper 20 inches of the horizon contains between 18 and 30 percent clay.  Reaction ranges from strongly acid to medium acid.

The Bt/E horizon has hue of 2.5YR to 1OYR in shades of red, gray or brown.  Some pedons are mottled in shades of these colors.  It is clay, clay loam, sandy clay, or sandy clay loam.  The texture increases with depth and contains 35 to 50 percent clay in the lower part.  About 5 to 15 percent of the horizon consists of pockets and vertical streaks of clean sand and silt.  Reaction is very strongly or strongly acid.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Allen, Avilla, Bama, Etowah, Holston, Leesburg, Minvale, Nella, Norfolk, Octavia, Orangeburg, Pikeville, Ruston, and Warnock series.  All of these soils have an epipedon less than 20 inches thick.  Leesburg and Nella soils also contain 10 to 30 percent coarse fragments.  Norfolk and Orangeburg soils also have less than 20 percent silt in the control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Addielou soils are on mounds of nearly level to gently sloping areas.  Typically these soils are on the third or fourth terrace levels of the Red River terrace system.  Dominantly these sediments are of Pleistocene Age.  Slopes are mainly 0 to 3 percent, but range to 5 percent.  The soil formed in acid, loamy alluvial sediments.  The mean annual temperature ranges from about 63 to 68 degrees F.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 40 to 48 inches, and Thornthwaite P-E index from 66 to 80.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Bernaldo, Freestone and Kullit series and the Annona series.  Bernaldo, Freestone, Kullit and Annona are on slightly lower positions and are normally in intermound areas.  These associated soils have A horizons of less than 20 inches thick; in addition the Annona soils have a clayey subsoil.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained; slow runoff; slow internal drainage; moderately slow permeability.  A seasonal high water table is at a depth of 40 to 60 inches 2 to 3 months each year during the cool season.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas have been cleared of timber and were cultivated but are now in pasture.  Native vegetation consist mainly of loblolly and shortleaf pine, post oak, red oak, and sweetgum with indiangrass, little bluestem, big bluestem, pinehill bluestem and longleaf uniola.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern Coastal Plain of Texas and possibly adjoining states.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Red River County, Texas; 1972.

REMARKS:  These soils were formerly included in the Bowie and Sawyer series.  The deep loamy surface layer, clayey lower subsoil and low base saturation required the establishment of a new series.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - from the surface to 28 inches, the A and E horizons.

Argillic horizon - includes the Bt horizons from a depth of 29 to 90 inches.  There is approximately a 20 to 30 percent increase in clay content of the Bt horizon below a depth of 60 inches.

Glossic properties - Streaks and pockets of clean sand and silt range from 5 to 15 percent in the lower Bt horizons.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  The field test kit indicates that base saturation in the typifying pedon is 27 percent and Ca+Mg is 4.0 meq./100 grams of soil.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U. S. A.


