LOCATION ADEN                   VA

Established Series
Rev. JHE-DDR
03/2022

ADEN SERIES

Soils of the Aden Series are very deep and poorly drained. They formed on low stream terraces of the Piedmont Plateau in alluvial sediments that dominantly washed from soils of the Triassic area.  Slopes range from 0 to 4 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 40 inches.  Mean annual temperature is about 56 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, semiactive, mesic Aeric epiaqualfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Aden silt loam on a 2 percent slope in a mixed hardwood and pine forest (colors are for moist soils).

     Oi--0 to 1 inch; partially decomposed leaves, pine needles and twigs.

     Ap--1 to 9 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) silt loam; many medium and fine distinct light gray (10YR 7/1) and very pale brown (10YR 7/3) mottles; moderate fine granular structure; friable, slightly sticky; many fine medium and coarse roots; 1 percent subrounded quartz gravel; strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (0 to 10 inches thick.)

     Btg--9 to 15 inches; light gray (10YR 7/1) silty clay loam, many medium distinct light brownish gray(10YR 6/2) and brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) mottles; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; firm, slightly plastic, sticky; many fine medium and coarse roots; 1 percent subrounded quartz gravel; few distinct clay films on ped faces;  common Fe-Mn streaks and concretions; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

     Bt1--15 to 32 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) clay; common medium and fine prominent light gray (10YR 7/1) and pinkish gray (7.5YR 6/2) mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm, plastic, sticky; fine and medium roots; many Fe-Mn concretions and streaks.  Common distinct and prominent clay films on ped faces; 1 percent subrounded quartz gravel; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

     Bt2--32 to 59 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) silty clay loam; common fine and medium distinct pinkish gray (7.5YR 6/2) mottles; weak medium and fine subangular blocky structure, firm, slightly plastic, sticky; few fine roots; few distinct clay films on faces of peds; 1 percent subrounded quartz gravel; many medium Fe-Mn concretions and streaks; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the B ranges from 30 to 60 inches).

     C--59 to 79 inches;  Mottled pinkish gray (5YR 6/2), yellowish red (5YR 5/8) and yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) silt loam; structureless; friable, slightly sticky; common medium Fe-Mn concretions and streaks; few fine mica flakes; 1 percent silt stone gravels; very strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.

     Cr--79 inches; partially weathered, red (2.5YR 5/6) silt stone with light gray (10YR 7/1) clay coatings in crevices.

TYPE LOCATION:  Prince William County, Virginia; about 1,000 feet east of Va. Route 611 and about 1,200 feet north of Cedar Run.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 40 to more than 60 inches.  Depth to bedrock is more than 5 feet.  Rock fragments of quartz gravel and siltstone fragments range from 1 to 5 percent in the solum and 1 to 15 percent in the C horizon.  Reaction is strongly acid or very strongly acid unless limed.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 4 or 6, and chroma of 3 or 4.  Low chroma mottling is common.  Texture is silt loam.

The E horizon, where present, has hue of 7.5YR through 2.5Y, value of 5 through 7 and chroma of 0 through 4.  Texture is silt loam.

The B horizon has hue of 5YR through 10YR, value of 4 through 7, and chroma of 1 through 6.  Texture is clay loam, silty clay loam, silty clay or clay.

The C horizon has hue of 5YR through 10YR, value of 5 through 7, and chroma of 0 through 8.  Texture is silt loam, loam or fine sandy loam.

The Cr horizon is partially weathered silt stone, sandstone or conglomerate of the Triassic area of the Piedmont Plateau.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Crosby, Jeddo, Library, McGary, Parsippany, Randolph and Savona.  The Crosby and Jeddo soils are developed in calcareous glacial till.  Library soils are 40 to 60 inches to calcareous shale or thin bedded limestone.  McGary soils formed in lacustrine deposits and have a 24 to 40 inch solum.  Parsippany soils are located in large basin areas and have lamella in the control section.  Randolph soils are 20 to 40 inches to limestone bedrock. Savona soils are formed in glacial outwash and underlain with sand and gravel.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Aden soils are on low, nearly level to gently sloping stream terraces in the Culpeper Basin of the Triassic area of the Piedmont Plateau.  These soils developed in alluvial sediments that washed mainly from Triassic upland soils.  Most of the soil areas are subject to occasional flooding, and ponding is common on many areas during winter and spring months.  Water table is commonly at the surface during winter and spring months.  Slopes range from 0 to 4 percent. Mean annual precipitation is about 38 to 44 inches.  Mean annual temperature is from 55 to 57 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These soils are associated dominantly with the Bermudian and Roland soils of the flood plains and the Arcola, Nestoria and Reaville of the uplands.  The well drained Bermudian and the moderately well to somewhat poorly drained Roland soils are on slightly lower elevations in the landscape and have thinner and coarser textured subsoils. The Arcola, Nestoria and Reaville are developed in residuum from silt stone and sandstone and are shallower to bedrock.  DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained.  Slow runoff and slow internal drainage.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:

USE AND VEGETATION:  The acreage is about evenly divided between mixed hardwood and pine forest and pasture.  Only a few small areas are used for cultivated crops and winter grains.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Virginia; possibly Maryland; The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Prince William County, Virginia 1985.

REMARKS: This soil was previously mapped as Augusta, Lamington, Roanoke or Kinkora soils.  National Cooperative Soil Survey

03/2022 revision: Oi had 1 to 0 inch depths, corrected to be 0 to 1 in horizon depths then added 1 inch to all horizon depths throughout the typical pedon. WJN

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
