LOCATION ANAHEIM                CA

Established Series
Rev. JKW-GMK-LAB
02/2003

ANAHEIM SERIES

The soils of the Anaheim series are well-drained, moderately deep soils over weathered fine grained sandstone and shale.  They are on foothills and formed in material weathered from fine grained sandstone or shell.  The mean annual precipitation is about 1 6 inches and the mean annual air temperature is about 61 F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, thermic Pachic Haploxerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Anaheim clay loam, native brush. (Colors are for dry soil unless noted).

    A11--0 to 9 inches; grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) when moist; moderate, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, sticky and plastic; common very fine roots; many very fine tubular pores; slightly acid (pH 6.5); clear, smooth boundary.  (6 to 12 inches thick)

    A12--9 to 17 inches; grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) when moist; moderate, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, sticky and plastic; common very fine roots; many very fine and fine tubular pores; neutral (pH 7.0); clear, wavy boundary.  (7 to 12 inches thick)

    A13--17 to 26 inches; grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) clay loam, dark brown (10YR 3/3) when moist; weak, medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, sticky and plastic; common very fine roots; many very fine and fine tabular pores; slightly alkaline (pH 7.5); abrupt, wavy boundary.  (7 to 12 inches thick)

    Cr--26 to 54 inches, weathered fractured fine grained sandstone and shale coated with lime on the upper 6 inches of fracture faces.

TYPE LOCATION:  Orange County, California; about 3,000 feet north of Blue Mud Canyon, Chino Hills, Rancho Santa Ana NE1/4 NW1/4 sec. 20 (projected), T. 3 S, R. 8 W., SBBM.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Depth to a paralithic contact ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Usually the soil between depths of 5 to 15 inches is continuously dry in all parts from late April or May until late October or November and is moist in some parts all the rest of the year.  The mean annual soil temperature at a depth of 20 inches is 60 to 65 F, and the soil temperature is usually not below 47 F at any time.  In some pedons, a few vertical cracks up to 1/4 inch wide occur to a depth of 20 inches or more but slickensides are absent.

The A horizon is brown, grayish brown, or dark grayish brown in 10YR hue.  It has 1 to 3 percent organic matter to a depth of more than 20 inches.  This horizon ranges from slightly acid to slightly alkaline.

The Cr horizon is weathered sandstone or shale or both.  It lacks lime coatings on the upper fracture faces in some pedons.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Agueda, Alo, Balcom, Bosanko, Conejo, Fontana, Gazos, and Nacimiento series.  Agueda and Conejo soils lack a paralithic contact.  Alo and Bosanko soils have clay texture and intersecting slickensides.  Balcom and Nacimiento soils are calcareous throughout.  Fontana soils have a mollic epipedon less than 20 inches thick and have free lime in the lower part of the solum.  Gazos soils have a lithic contact.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Anaheim soils are on moderately steep to very steep foothills at elevations of 100 to 2,500 feet.  They formed in material weathered from fine grained sandstone and/or shale.  The climate is dry subhumid, mesothermal with warm dry summers and cool moist winter.  Mean annual precipitation is 12 to 20 inches, mean annual temperature is 60 to 63 F, average July temperature is about 69 to 74 F.   The frost-free season is about 300 to 350 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Al, Balcom, Bosanko, and Nacimiento soils and the Calleguas and Myford soils.  Calleguas soils are calcareous throughout and have a paralithic contact at depths of less than 20 inches.  Cienaba soils have led than 18 percent clay and a paralithic contact at depth of less than 20 inches.  Myford soils have argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well-drained; rapid to very rapid runoff; moderate to moderately slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used for production of pasture, range, barley, and for watershed.  Vegetation is mostly brush with an undercover of annual grasses and forbs in some areas.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Upland foothills in Southern California.  The soils are of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Davis, California

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Orange County (Orange and Western Part of Riverside Counties), California, 1974

REMARKS:  The Anaheim soils would have been classified as Brunizems.

The activity class was added to the classification in January of 2003. Competing series were not checked at that time. - ET

Last revised by the state on 10/74.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
