LOCATION ANAMITE                NM

Established Series
Rev. DNC/VGL/WWJ
04/2006

ANAMITE SERIES

The Anamite series consists of very deep, well drained soils that formed in moderately fine and fine textured silty water-deposited sediment primarily from rhyolitic rock but containing lesser amounts of material from felsitic and basaltic rocks and limestone.  Anamite soils are on very level, smooth plains that are believed to be relic beds of shallow lakes and have slopes typically less than 1 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 14 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 58 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, active, thermic Ustic Haplocambids

TYPICAL PEDON: Anamite silty clay loam - rangeland (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

     A--0 to 3 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; moderate very fine granular structure; soft, friable, slightly sticky; many fine roots; many very fine pores; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary (0 to 5 inches thick.)

     Bw--3 to 14 inches; light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) silty clay, grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; hard, firm, very sticky; common fine and very fine roots; common very fine pores; moderately alkaline; clear wavy boundary. (8 to 14 inches thick.)

     Bk--14 to 43 inches; light olive gray (5Y 6/2) silty clay, olive gray (5Y 5/2) moist; weak fine and medium angular blocky structure; hard, firm, very sticky; common fine roots; common very fine pores; faint evidence of stratification in lower part; noncalcareous in upper part, slightly calcareous in lower few inches, lime in common fine soft bodies; moderately alkaline; clear wavy boundary. (23 to 33 inches thick.)

     Ck--43 to 56 inches; light gray (5Y 7/2) silty clay; olive gray (5Y 5/2) moist; structureless, massive; hard, firm, very sticky; few fine roots; few very fine pores; slightly calcareous, lime in common fine bodies in the upper few inches, but numbers decrease sharply as depth increases and lime in lower part is disseminated; few fine iron-manganese stains; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION: Hidalgo County, New Mexico; two miles southeast of the Fitzpatric ranch building, 0.1 mile west of the north quarter corner, sec. 2, T. 34 5., R. 20 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 

Thickness of the solum: 20 to 50 inches

Some pedons have strata of sand and gravel below depths of 40 inches.

Soil temperature: 59 degrees to 71.6 degrees F.

Soil Moisture: These soils are usually dry, and are dry most of the time between October and May. Ustic aridic moisture regime.

Reaction: typically slightly alkaline but some are moderately alkaline

The soil commonly has gravel on the surface usually covering less than 5 percent of the area

A horizon
Hue: 7.5YR or 10YR
Value: 5 or 6 dry and 3 to 5 moist
Chroma: 1 or 2
Organic matter content of the upper 15 inches: averages less than 1 percent
Texture: silty clay loam to silty clay or clay

B horizon
Hue: 2.5Y or 5Y
Value: 5 through 7 dry and 4 through 6 moist
Chroma: 1 or 2
Texture: silty clay loam to silty clay or clay
Structure: typically weak angular blocky but some is weak or moderate subangular blocky
Calcium carbonate: Typically segregated lime is in the lower part of the B horizon, but a few pedons have lime only in the upper part of the C horizon. The CaC03 content is less than 15 percent

C horizon
Hue: 2.5Y or 5Y
Value: 6 or 7 dry and 5 or 6 moist
Chroma: 1 through 3
A few pedons have few fine faint mottles in the lower part of the B horizon or the upper part of the C horizon.

COMPETING SERIES: There are no competing series.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The Anamite soils are on very level, smooth plains that are believed to be relic beds of shallow lakes. Slopes are typically less than 1 percent. The regolith is moderately fine and fine textured silty water-deposited sediment primarily from rhyolitic rock but containing lesser amounts of material from felsitic and basaltic rocks and limestone. The climate is semiarid continental. The average annual precipitation is about 14 inches, and the average annual temperature is about 58 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are principally the Cloverdale, Eicks, Forrest, and Stellar series, all of which have argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: These soils are well drained. Permeability is very slow.

USE AND VEGETATION: Principal use is for rangeland and wildlife.  Vegetation is a sparse cover of buffalo grass tobosa, annual grasses and forbs.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Present known distribution is southwestern New Mexico. The soil is of moderate extent. MLRA 41.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Animas Valley Area, Hidalgo County, New Mexico, 1938.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - The zone from 0 to 3 inches (A horizon)

Cambic horizon - The zone from 3 to 14 inches (Bw horizon)

This revision retains the original concept of this series.

OSED scanned by SSQA.

Last revised by state on 09/67.

In October 2000, taxonomic classification was converted to the closest match found in Soil Taxonomy, Second Edition 1999.  No update was made to horizon nomenclature, competing series section, etc.  Other placements may be more appropriate after a complete update.

Classified according to Soil Taxonomy Second Edition, 1999

ADDITIONAL DATA: NSSL data S92NM 023 002

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
