LOCATION ANONES                 PR

Established Series
Rev. RER; GRB
11/2004

ANONES SERIES

The Anones series consists of moderately deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils on side slopes of strongly dissected uplands.  They formed in material that weathered from volcanic rocks.  Near the type location, the mean annual precipitation is about 90 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 75 degrees F.  Slopes range from 12 to 60 percent. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, parasesquic, isohyperthermic Humic Dystrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Anones clay--Elephant grass (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 6 inches; dusky red (2.5YR 3/2) clay; weak fine granular structure; firm; nonsticky, slightly plastic; many fine roots; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

     Bw1--6 to 13 inches; dusky red (2.5YR 3/2), silty clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; firm; nonsticky, slightly plastic; common fine roots; very fine pores; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bw2--13 to 27 inches; weak red (10R 4/2) loam; massive; very friable; nonsticky, nonplastic; common fine roots; strongly acid; about 40 percent, by volume, saprolite; gradual wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bw horizons range from 20 to 28 inches)

     Cr--27 to 40 inches; saprolite consisting of highly weathered volcanic rock with original rock structure visible.  Rock fragments are easily broken between fingers; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Oeste SCD, Puerto Rico; approximately 5.0 miles east of the town of Maricao, about 3 kilometers on dirt road from kilometer marker 33.2 of P.R. Highway 105, and about 50 feet west of dirt road.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the solum and depth to the highly weathered saprolite ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Reaction ranges from very strongly acid to strongly acid throughout.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 10R or 2.5YR, value of 3 and 4, and chroma of 2 to 4.  Texture is silty clay or clay.

The Bw horizon has hue of 10R or 2.5YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 to 4.  In the lower horizons, saprolite composes up to 60 percent of the horizon.  Texture is loam or silty clay loam.

The BC horizon, where present, has hue of 10R or 2.5YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 3 to 6; or there is no dominant color and it is variegated in shades of red, yellow, brown, gray, and white.  Texture is loam or silty clay loam.

The Cr horizon is composed of saprolite that is easily rippable by machinery.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no known series in the same family.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Anones soils are on side slopes of strongly dissected uplands.  Slopes range from 12 to 60 percent.  They formed in material that consists of medium-textured residuum which derived from very highly weathered basic volcanic rocks.  The climate is humid tropical.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 85 to 95 inches and the average annual temperature ranges from 74 to 76 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the Caguabo, Consumo, Humatas, and Mucara series.  All of these soils are on similar positions as Anones soils.   Caguabo soils are shallow to bedrock and have less clay in the control section.  Consumo soils have argillic horizons and mixed mineralogy.  Humatas soils are very deep, have argillic horizons, have parasesquic mineralogy, and have more clay in the control section.  Mucara soils have yellowier subsoils, have mixed mineralogy, and have less clay in the control section.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of Anones soils are used for coffee and subsistence crops.  The vegetation consists of native and introduced grasses, shrubs, and trees.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Humid uplands of Puerto Rico.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Raleigh, North Carolina.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Oeste SCD, Puerto Rico; 1963.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:

Umbric epipedon - the zone from 0 to 6 inches (Ap horizon).

Cambic horizon - the zone from 6 to 27 inches (Bw1 and Bw2 horizon).

Paralithic contact - at 27 inches.

These soils were formerly included and mapped with the Alonso series from which they differ in being shallower to the saprolite and in not having a well developed B horizon.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
