LOCATION ANTOINE                AR

Established Series
JWO;RKR;AMR
06/2010

ANTOINE SERIES

The Antoine series consists of very deep, moderately well drained, slowly permeable soils that formed in loamy and clayey marine sediments of Cretaceous age. These soils are on interfluves of the Cretaceous Western Coastal Plain. Slopes are dominantly 1 to 6 percent but can range up to 15 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, semiactive, thermic Aquic Paleudults 

TYPICAL PEDON: Antoine silt loam, 1 to 6 percent slopes (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.) 

  A--0 to 8 cm (0 to 3 in); dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; weak medium granular structure; friable; common fine and medium roots; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary. 

  Bt1--8 to 23 cm (3 to 9 in); yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine faint patchy clay film on faces of peds; common very fine, fine and medium roots; less than 5 percent fragments of sandstone less than 1/2 inch in diameter; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary. 

  Bt2--23 to 58 cm (9 to 23 in); brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) loam; few medium distinct light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) iron depletions; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; firm; few fine faint patchy clay films on faces of peds; common fine and medium roots; less than 5 percent fragments of sandstone less than 1/2 inch in diameter; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary. 

  Bt3--58 to 89 cm (23 to 35 in); yellowish red (5YR 5/8) and light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine faint patchy clay films on faces of peds; few fine roots; less than 5 percent fragments of sandstone less than 1/2 inch in diameter; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary. 

  Bt4--89 to 119 cm (35 to 47 in); yellowish red (5YR 5/8) and light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) silt loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; common fine faint discontinuous clay films on faces of peds; few fine roots; less than 5 percent fragments of sandstone less than 1/2 inch in diameter;very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary. 

  Btg--119 to 203 cm (47 to 80 in); light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) clay loam; many coarse prominent yellowish red (5YR 5/8) iron accumulations; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; many fine distinct discontinuous clay films on faces of peds; few fine roots; less than 5 percent fragments of sandstone less than 1/2 inch in diameter; very strongly acid; 

TYPE LOCATION: Pike County, Arkansas; NW1/4, SE1/4, NW1/4 sec. 7, T. 9 S., R. 23 W.; USGS Piney Grove Quadrangle; Latitude 33 degrees, 58 minutes, 55 seconds North; Longitude 93 degrees, 29 minutes, 40 seconds. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Solum thickness: ranges from 60 to 80 inches or more
Content of sandstone fragments less than 3 inches in diameter ranges from 0 to 10 percent by volume throughout. 

A horizon
Hue: 10YR
Value: 3 to 5
Chroma: 2 to 4
Texture: silt loam, very fine sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or loam
Reaction: slightly acid to very strongly acid. 

E horizon, where present
Hue: 10YR
Value: 5 or 6
Chroma: 4 or 6
Texture: loam, silt loam, fine sandy loam, or very fine sandy loam
Reaction: moderately acid to very strongly acid. 

BE horizon, where present
Hue: 10YR
Value: 5 to 7
Chroma: 6 to 8
Texture: fine sandy loam, very fine sandy loam, silt loam, or loam.
Reaction: moderately acid to very strongly acid. 

Upper Bt horizon(s)
Hue: 5YR to 10YR
Value: 4 or 5
Chroma: 6 or 8.
Redoximorphic features range from none to common in shades of gray, red or brown.
In some pedons, these horizons are variegated in various shades of red, gray, and brown.
Texture: silt loam, loam, or silty clay loam
Reaction: medium acid to very strongly acid. 

Lower Bt horizon(s)
Hue: 2.5YR to 10YR
Value: 5 or 6
Chroma: 6 or 8
Redoximorphic features in shades of gray, brown, or red.
In some pedons, these horizons are variegated in various shades of gray, brown and red. Some horizons have few weakly cemented black Iron-Manganese nodules.
Texture: silty clay loam, silty clay, or clay loam
Reaction: strongly acid to very strongly acid. 

The Btg horizon(s)
Hue: 10YR
Value: 5 or 6
Chroma: 1 or 2
Redoximorphic features in shades of gray, brown and red
OR
Variegated in various shades of gray, brown, red and yellow.
Some horizons have few weakly cemented black iron-manganese nodules
Texture: silty clay loam, silty clay, clay loam or clay
Reaction: slightly acid to very strongly acid. 

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Exum and Felker series in the same family.
Exum soils contain plinthite nodules and are moderately slowly permeable.
Felker soils commonly have pockets and streaks of uncoated sand grains and less than 30 percent clay in the argillic horizon, and are somewhat poorly drained. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The Antoine soils are on nearly level through moderately steep landscapes on uplands of the Cretaceous Western Coastal Plain. Slopes range from 1 to 15 percent. The soil formed in loamy and clayey marine sediments of Cretaceous age. The average annual temperature ranges from about 16 to 19 degrees C (60 to 66 degrees F) and the average annual precipitation ranges from about 1219 to 1372 mm (48 to 54 in). 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These include the Biggs, Fairview, Stelltown, and Tiak soils.
Biggs soils, which are on adjacent similar landscapes, are in a fine-loamy particle size class and are well drained.
Fairview soils, which are on broad gently sloping area, have a fine-loamy control section.
Stelltown soils, which occur on lower sideslope positions, have a coarse-loamy control section and moderate permeability.
Tiak soils, which are on adjacent sideslopes are in a fine particle size class. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Moderately well drained; slow to rapid runoff and slow permeability. A perched seasonally high water table is 1 to 3 feet below the soil surface from December through April during most years. 

USE AND VEGETATION: Most areas of this soil are in forests of loblolly and shortleaf pine. Cleared areas are dominantly used for pasture. The native vegetation was mixed shortleaf pine and hardwood forest. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: The Cretaceous Western Coastal Plain of Arkansas and possibly Oklahoma. The series is of moderate extent. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Pike County, Arkansas; 2006. 

REMARKS: These soils were formerly included in the Kullit and Sawyer series. The following diagnostic horizons and features are recognized in this pedon: 
Ochric epipedon - The zone from the surface to a depth of 8 inches. 
Argillic horizon - The zone from 8 to 203 cm (3 to 80 in). 

ADDITIONAL DATA: Characterization of the type location by the National Soil Survey Laboratory. Pedon No. S03AR-109-005. 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
