LOCATION ARRINGTON              TN+AR

Established Series
Rev. DEL:RPS
04/2001

ARRINGTON SERIES

The Arrington series consists of very deep, well drained soils with thick dark surface layers.  They formed in silty alluvium on flood plains and along drainageways.  Slopes are dominantly 0 to 3 percent but range up to 8 percent on escarpments and along drainageways near major streams.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, superactive, thermic Cumulic Hapludolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Arrington silt loam - cultivated.  (Colors are for moist soils unless otherwise stated.)

    Ap--0 to 10 inches, dark brown (10YR 3/3) silt loam; moderate fine granular structure; very friable; many fine roots; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to 10 inches thick)

    A--10 to 26 inches, dark brown (10YR 3/3) silt loam; few fine faint brown mottles; weak fine granular structure; very friable; common fine roots; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (18 to 25 inches thick)

    Bw1--26 to 44 inches, dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4) silt loam; few fine faint brown and yellowish brown mottles; weak medium subangular blocky structure that parts to weak fine and medium granular structure; friable; common fine roots; few fine black concentrations; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

    Bw2--44 to 50 inches, dark brown (10YR 3/3) silt loam; few fine faint yellowish brown mottles; weak fine and medium granular structure; friable; few fine roots; few fine black concentrations; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bw horizon ranges from 10 to 40 inches)

    C--50 to 75 inches, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; few fine and medium distinct dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) and few fine faint grayish brown and brown  mottles; massive; friable; common fine black concretions; neutral.

TYPE LOCATION:  Giles County, Tennessee; five miles west of Pulaski, one-fourth mile north of U.S. Highway 64, and 200 feet west of Richland Creek.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 40 to greater than 60 inches.  The mollic epipedon ranges from 24 to greater than 50 inches in thickness.  Reaction ranges from slightly acid to mildly alkaline.  Coarse fragments range from 0 to 5 percent in the solum and from 0 to 15 percent in the C horizon.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 3, and chroma of 2 or 3. Some pedons have a few faint mottles in shades of brown.  The texture is commonly silt loam and less commonly silty clay loam or loam.

The Bw horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 3 or 4, or hue of 7.5YR, value of 3 or 4 and chroma of 2 or 4.  Some pedons have mottles in shades of brown.  Texture is silt loam or silty clay loam.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 2 to 4.  Mottles range from none to common in shades of brown or gray.  Texture is dominantly silt loam or silty clay loam, but the range includes loam, clay loam, and clay.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Redport and Verdigris series in the same family and the closely related Cannon, Egam, Huntington, Lynnville, and Staser series.  Redport soils have hue of 5YR or redder and are commonly calcareous.  Verdigris soils are in a region with a mean annual precipitation range of 35 to 47 inches and are probably dry for longer periods during most years.  Cannon soils have more than 15 percent coarse fragments in each horizon.  Egam soils average more than 35 percent clay in the control section.  Huntington soils have a mollic epipedon less than 24 inches thick and are mesic.  Lynnville soils have a mollic epipedon less than 24 inches thick and have mottles of chroma 2 or less immediately below the mollic epipedon.  Staser soils are fine-loamy.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  These soils are on nearly level flood plains and along drainageways.  Slopes are dominantly 0 to 3 percent but range up to 8 percent percent on escarpments and along drainageways near major streams.  Arrington soils formed in recent alluvium.  Mean annual rainfall is 55 inches and mean annual temperature is 59 degrees F. near the type location.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Egam, Godwin, Lanton, Lynnville, and Staser series.  The Armour, Bradyville, Etowah, Pickwick, and Talbott series are on terraces and uplands and argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium or slow surface runoff: moderate permeability.  These soils are flooded for brief periods mostly during the winter and early spring.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are cleared and used for cultivated crops, pasture, and hay.  The native vegetation was bottom land oaks, hickory, elm, hackberry, maple, beech, black walnut, ash, yellow-poplar, and sycamore.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Nashville Basin, the Highland Rim, in Tennessee and possibly Sand Mountain in northern Alabama and northwest Georgia  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  DeKalb County, Tennessee; 1970.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons recognized in this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - 0 to 26 inches (Ap, A horizons)

Cambic horizon -26 to 50 inches (Bw1, Bw2 horizons)

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
