LOCATION ASHWOOD                TN+KY

Established Series
Rev. RPS:CM
04/2001

ASHWOOD SERIES

The Ashwood series consists of moderately deep, well drained soils on uplands.  They formed in residuum weathered from phosphatic limestone.  Slopes range from 2 to 70 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, superactive, thermic Vertic Argiudolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Ashwood silty clay loam - cultivated. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

    Ap--0 to 5 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silty clay loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 7 inches thick)

    BA--5 to 9 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silty clay; strong fine and medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (0 to 8 inches thick)

    Bt1--9 to 13 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) clay; moderate medium and fine subangular blocky structure; firm; few distinct clay films on faces of peds; common fine roots; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary.

    Bt2--13 to 19 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) clay; few vertical streaks and channels of very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2); moderate medium subangular and angular blocky structure; very firm; few fine roots; many distinct clay films on faces of peds; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary.

     Bt3--19 to 25 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) clay; moderate fine and medium angular blocky structure; very firm; few fine roots; many distinct clay films on faces of peds; few fine black concretions; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary.

    Bt4--25 to 36 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) clay; few fine and medium prominent light olive brown (2.5Y 5/4) and grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) mottles; weak fine angular blocky structure; very firm; few distinct clay films on faces of peds; few dark brown concretions; few thin channers and flagstones of limestone; neutral; abrupt wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bt horizon ranges from 13 to 33 inches.)

    R--36 inches, hard limestone.

TYPE LOCATION:  Rutherford County, Tennessee; 1 1/4 miles west of Eagleville; 100 feet south of Eagleville-Allisona Road; 150 feet west of house on Gordon Lamb's farm.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness and depth to bedrock ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Reaction ranges from medium acid to mildly alkaline.  Cracks as much as about 1/2 inch in width extend to a depth of about 15 inches during long dry periods. The mollic epipedon extends into the upper part of the Bt horizon in most pedons.  Rock fragments range from 0 to 15 percent in A and B horizons and 5 to 25 percent in the BC and C horizons.

The A and BA horizons and upper part of the Bt horizon in most pedons have hue of 7.5YR, 10YR, or 2.5Y; value of 2 or 3; and chroma of 2 or 3.   The A and BA horizons are silt loam, silty clay loam, or rarely silty clay.

The Bt horizon below the mollic epipedon has hue of 7.5YR, 10YR, or 2.5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 6.  Some pedons have mottles in shades of brown, olive or gray in the lower part.  The Bt horizon is clay or silty clay.

The BC and C horizons, where present, have hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 or 6.  Mottles are in shades of gray, brown, or olive.  Texture of the fine earth is clay or silty clay.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no series in the same family.  Similar soils are the Barfield, Dennis, Egam, Eram, Godwin and Summit soils.  Barfield soils are less than 20 inches deep to bedrock.  Dennis soils do not have bedrock within a 60-inch depth.  Eram soils have mottles with chroma of 2 within 6 inches of the lower boundary of the mollic epipedon. Egam and Godwin soils lack argillic horizons and have mollic epipedons more than 24 inches thick.  Summit soils have vertic properties.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Ashwood soils are on uplands.  Slopes range from 2 to 70 percent.  The soils have formed in residuum weathered from phosphatic limestone.  Average annual temperature is about 60 degrees F.  and average annual precipitation is about 49 inches near the type location.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Barfield soils and the Braxton, Hampshire, Inman, Maury, and Mimosa soils, all of which have ochric epipedons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium and rapid runoff; moderately slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  About one-third of the soil is cleared and used mainly for pasture.  The native vegetation is forests of hickory, hackberry, elm, black walnut, redbud, black locust, ash, and red cedar.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Central Basin of Tennessee and possibly the Bluegrass region of Kentucky.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Maury County, Tennessee; 1955.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons recognized in this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - 0 to 13 inches (Ap, BA, Bt1 horizons).

Argillic horizon - 9 to 36 inches (Bt horizon)

Classification only was changed in 7/94.  Competing series and other items will be updated later.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
