LOCATION ASPERSON               WY

Tentative Series
Rev. AJC/SSP
05/2003

ASPERSON SERIES

The Asperson series consists of moderately deep, well drained soils that formed in clayey slope alluvium over residuum derived from calcareous shale.  Asperson soils are on hills and ridges.  Slopes range from 2 to 50 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 18 inches and the mean annual air temperature is about 38 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic Ustic Haplocryalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Asperson silt loam - forestland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted)

     Oi--0 to 1 inches; slightly decomposed organic material principally leaves, twigs, bark and grasses.

     Oe--1 to 2 inches; moderately decomposed organic material like that of the horizon above.

     A--2 to 4 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) silt loam, black (10YR 2/1) moist; strong fine granular structure; soft, very friable, slightly plastic; noncalcareous; neutral, pH 6.8 (bromthymol blue); abrupt smooth boundary.  (0 to 4 inches thick)

     E--4 to 8 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) silty clay loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure that parts to moderate medium granular; slightly hard, very friable, slightly plastic; noncalcareous; neutral, pH 6.8 (bromthymol blue); clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 6 inches thick)

     Bt1--8 to 14 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) silty clay, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure that parts to strong fine angular blocky; extremely hard, very friable; moderately plastic, moderately sticky; thin continuous wax-like coatings on ped faces and wax-like coatings in root channels; wax-like rims about entrances to soil pores; noncalcareous; neutral, pH 7.2 (phenol red); clear wavy boundary.  (2 to 14 inches thick)

     Bt2--14 to 22 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) silty clay, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; moderate fine subangular blocky structure that parts to fine angular blocky; extremely hard, very friable; moderately plastic, moderately sticky; thin continuous wax-like coatings on ped faces and wax-like coatings and fillings in root channels; wax-like rims around entrances to soil pores; calcareous; moderately alkaline, pH 8.2 (cresol red): gradual wavy boundary.  (6 to 14 inches thick)

     Bt3--22 to 26 inches; light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) silty clay, grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; extremely hard, very friable; moderately plastic, moderately sticky; thin glossy patches on ped faces and discontinuous glossy coatings on the inside of root channels; calcareous; moderately alkaline, pH 8.2 (cresol red): diffuse wavy boundary.  (0 to 6 inches thick)

     2Cr--26 inches; dark gray calcareous shale.

TYPE LOCATION:  Carbon County, Wyoming.  The SE1/4 of the SW1/4 of Sec. 11, T18N, R89W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Depths are measured from the top of the mineral soil surface.

Soil moisture:  The soil moisture control section is affected by peak periods of precipitation in the spring and early summer; Udic moisture regime bordering on ustic.
Mean annual soil temperature:  about 41 degrees F
Mean summer soil temperature:  about 56 degrees F without an O horizon
Depth to paralithic contact:  20 to 40 inches to shale
Depth to albic horizon:  2 to 10 inches
Depth to base of argillic horizon:  17 to 50 inches
Depth to secondary calcium carbonate:  ? to ? inches
Base saturation: 60 to 100 percent
Reaction:  moderately or slightly acid

Particle-size control section (weighted average):  
  Clay content:  35 to 50 percent
  Sand content:  5 to 15 percent fine or coarser sand
  Rock fragments:  0 to 5 percent gravel and 0 to 3 percent cobble

A horizon:
Hue:  7.5YR to 5Y

Bt horizons:
Hue:  7.5YR to 5Y
Texture:  silty clay loam or silty clay

COMPETING SERIES:  Current competitors are the Chubbs, Goldpark, and Hatch series.

Chubbs: 20 to 40 inches to a lithic contact with limestone

Goldpark: does not have a paralithic or lithic contact within 40 inches of the surface

Hatch: has secondary calcium carbonate accumulations and redder hues

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Parent material: clayey slope alluvium over residuum derived from calcareous shale
Landform: gently to very steep hills and ridges
Slopes: 2 percent to about 50 or more percent
Elevation: 7,800 to 8,500 feet
Mean annual precipitation: about 18 inches at the type location with peak periods of precipitation occurring in the spring and early summer months
Mean annual air temperature: about 38 degrees F.
Mean summer air temperature: about 56 degrees F.
Frost-free period: 60 to 80 days

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the Contide and Rim series. The Contide series differs in having A and B horizons and in lacking bedrock above 40 inches.  The Rim series differs in having dark A horizons and continuous A and B horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is medium to very rapid. Permeability is moderately slow.  (0.2 - 0.6)

USE AND VEGETATION:  They are used as native rangeland, recreation, and forestry purposes.  Native vegetation includes aspen with a weak understory of grasses and shrubs.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Present known distribution limited to central Wyoming.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Bozeman, Montana
SERIES PROPOSED:  Sage Creek Watershed area, Carbon County, Wyoming.  Series name is a coined name.

REMARKS: 
Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
Particle-size control section:  The zone from 6 to 26 inches.  (Bt horizons)
Ochric epipedon:  The zone from 0 to 6 inches.  (A and E horizons)
Argillic horizon:  The zone from 6 to 26 inches.  (Bt horizons)
Paralithic contact:  The contact with shale at 26 inches.  (2Cr layer)

A paper revision and update of the series was made by MO6 August 2000.  The classification was changed from Typic Cryoboralfs to Ustic Haplocryalfs.  Format and horizonation designations were updated. The series has not been updated by the state since 1972.

The assignment of the cation-exchange activity class is inferred from lab data from similar soils in the surrounding area.

Taxonomic Version:  Second Edition of Soil Taxonomy 1999.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
