LOCATION JACKLAND               VA+MD

Established Series
Rev. JAK, DHK
01/2006

JACKLAND SERIES

Soils of the Jackland series are very deep, moderately well drained and somewhat poorly drained with very slow permeability.  They formed in residuum that weathered from diabase, basalt and gabbro of the Northern part of the Piedmont plateau.  Slopes range from 0 to 15 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 40 inches and mean annual temperature is about 55 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic, mesic Aquic Hapludalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Jackland silt loam on a 3 percent slope in a mixed hardwood and pine forest.  (Colors are for moist soil.)

    Ap--0 to 10 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) silt loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable, slightly plastic, slightly sticky; many fine, medium and coarse roots; 2 percent gravel and cobbles of diabase fragments; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 12 inches thick)

    BEt--10 to 15 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) silt loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm, sticky, plastic; common fine and medium roots; few, fine, medium, and coarse, faint pale brown (10YR 6/3) iron depletions; many fine iron-manganese concretions; 2 percent diabase gravel and cobble; many distinct clay films on faces of peds; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (0 to 10 inches thick)

    Bt1--15 to 30 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) clay; moderate coarse subangular blocky structure; very firm, very plastic, very sticky; few fine roots; common, fine and medium, distinct, gray (10YR 6/1) iron depletions; common fine and medium iron-manganese concretions; common prominent clay films on faces of peds; many pressure faces and slickensides; 1 percent diabase gravel and cobbles; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

    Bt2--30 to 35 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) clay; moderate coarse subangular blocky structure; very firm, very plastic, very sticky; few fine roots; common, fine and medium iron-manganese concretions; common prominent clay films on faces of peds; many pressure faces and slickensides; 1 percent diabase gravel and cobbles; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bt horizon ranges from 10 to 35 inches.)

    BCt--35 to 40 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; firm, plastic, sticky; few fine roots; common fine and medium iron-manganese concretions; few distinct and prominent clay films on faces of peds; 1 percent diabase gravel and cobbles; very strongly acid; diffuse wavy boundary.  (0 to 15 inches thick)

    C--40 to 65 inches; multicolored brown, yellow, green, white and black sandy loam; massive; friable, slightly plastic, sticky; common black iron-manganese streaks; thick very plastic clay flows in crevices in the upper 15 inches; 3 percent diabase gravel and cobbles; slightly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Prince William County, Virginia; in Conway Robinson Memorial Park, about 1.5 miles east of Gainesville, about 800 feet north of Route 29-211, about 300 feet west of picnic shelter.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 30 to 48 inches.  Depth to bedrock is more than 60 inches.  Partially weathered diabase or basalt gravel range from to 0 to 30 percent throughout.  Few boulders are in some pedons. Reaction is very strongly acid through moderately acid in the A and upper B horizons and from very strongly acid through mildly alkaline in the lower B and C horizons.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 2.5Y through 7.5YR, value of 2 through 5, and chroma of 0 through 6.  The Ap or A horizons are silt loam or loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The E horizon, where present, has hue of 2.5 Y through 7.5YR, value of 4 through 6 and chroma of 3 through 6.  It is silt loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The BE horizon, where present, has hue of 2.5Y through 7.5YR, value of 4 through 6 and chroma of 3 through 6.  It is silt loam, loam, or clay loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The Bt horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 3 through 6.  Some pedons have hue of 2.5Y in the lower B horizon.  The Bt horizon is clay in the fine-earth fraction.

The BC horizon, where present, has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 3 through 6.  Some pedons have hue of 2.5Y in the lower B horizon.  The BC horizon is clay loam, sandy clay loam, sandy clay, loam, silt loam, or silty clay loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The C horizon is commonly multicolored in shades of brown, yellow, white, green and black, or has hue of 5YR through 5Y, value of 4 through 7, and chroma of 0 through 8.  Texture is clay loam, sandy clay loam, sandy loam, or less commonly loamy sand in the fine-earth fraction.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Colp, Galland, Gorin, Keswick, and Weller soils.  All of these series are formed, in some degree, in loess cappings and do not have diabase or basalt coarse fragments.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Jackland soils are on the Northern part of the Piedmont Plateau uplands commonly associated with the Triassic Region.  These soils are on broad convex ridges and slope gradients range from 0 to 15 percent.  They have developed in residuum that weathered from diabase, basalt and gabbro.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from 36 to 44 inches and mean annual temperature ranges from 52 to 57 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These included the Haymarket. Legore, Montalto and Waxpool soils.  The Haymarket, Legore and Montalto soils have a water table below 40 inches.  In addition the Legore is coarser textured and the Montalto has red subsoils.  The Waxpool soils have a water table above 12 inches and have an abrupt textural change.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained and somewhat poorly drained; very slow permeability in the subsoil. Index surface runoff class is low to very high. 

USE AND VEGETATION:  The largest acreage is in hardwood and pine forest.   Sizeable acreage is in hay and pasture and a few areas are used for corn, soybeans, small grains, and other common crops of the area.  Woodland vegetation is mostly oaks, red maple, sweet gum and Virginia pine.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern Virginia Maryland and Pennsylvania.  The series is of moderately low extent.  About 4,000 acres mapped in Prince William County, Virginia.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Prince William County, Virginia, 1985.

REMARKS:  This soil has previously been mapped as Iredell series which is thermic and typic. 
The 5/2003 revision adds gabbro to the parent materials to facilitate correlation activities in the MO14 region. Minor revisions were also made to other sections.
Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: 
1. Ochric epipedon - zone from 0 to 15 inches (Ap and BEt horizons). 
2. Argillic horizon - zone from 15 to 40 inches (Bt and BCt horizons).
3. Aquic conditions - perched seasonal saturation from a depth of 10 to 30 inches (BEt and Bt1 horizons).

SIR=VA0184
MLRA=148
REVISED=9/97-RRD ; 5/2003-JAK,DHK 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
