LOCATION JANELEW                WV

Established Series
SLH-DJB/Rev. MDJ
12/2012

JANELEW SERIES

MLRAs: 126 (Central Allegheny Plateau)

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, active, calcareous, mesic Typic Udorthents

TYPICAL PEDON: Janelew channery silt loam, on a 6 percent slope in a pasture. (Colors are for moist soil.)

    A--0 to 8 cm (0 to 3 inches); dark brown (10YR 3/3) channery silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine roots; 15 percent rock fragments (90 percent mudstone and 10 percent sandstone); neutral; clear wavy boundary. (0 to 15 cm thick)

    C1--8 to 53 cm (3 to 21 inches); brown (10YR 4/3) channery silty clay loam; common medium olive (5Y 4/4), dark brown (10YR 3/3) and strong brown (7.5YR 4/6) lithochromic mottles; massive; firm; many fine roots; 25 percent rock fragments (95 percent mudstone and 5 percent sandstone); slightly effervescent; moderately alkaline; clear wavy boundary.

    C2--53 to 84 cm (21 to 33 inches); brown (10YR 4/3) very channery silty clay loam; common medium dark brown (10YR 3/3), olive (5Y 4/4) and black (N 2/0) lithochromic mottles; massive; firm; 55 percent rock fragments (85 percent mudstone, 10 percent sandstone and 5 percent limestone); slightly effervescent; mildly alkaline; clear wavy boundary.

    C3--84 to 165 cm (33 to 65 inches); brown (10YR 4/3) extremely channery silty clay loam; common medium yellowish brown (10YR 5/4 and 5/8) and gray (5Y 5/1) lithochromic mottles; massive; firm; 65 percent rock fragments (90 percent mudstone and 10 percent sandstone); slightly effervescent; mildly alkaline. (Combined thickness of the C horizon is 152 cm or more.)

TYPE LOCATION: 
State:  West Virginia
County:  Lewis
USGS Tographic Quadrangle:  Berlin, WV
Latitude:  39.083583 N NAD 83
Longitude:  80.343639 W NAD 83
Directions:  about 0.75 mile south of Jesse Run and 2.8 miles east of I-79.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Depth to Bedrock: Greater than 152 cm (60 inches)
Depth Class: Very Deep
Rock Fragment Content: 20 to 80 percent, by volume, in individual horizons, but average 35 to 75 percent in the particle-size control section
Rock Fragment Size: 2 mm to 25 cm, but can include stones and boulders
Rock Fragment Type: Mudstone, sandstone, limestone, siltstone, shale and coal. The percentage of mudstone is 65 to 100 percent of the total rock fragments in the control section.
Fine-Earth Fraction: The particle-size control section ranges from 23 to 35 percent clay and 7 to 23 percent fine and coarser sand. The percent of fine and coarser sand is commonly less than 15 percent.
Soil Reaction: Neutral through moderately alkaline

Range of Individual Horizons:
A horizon (if it occurs):
Color--hue of 5YR through 10YR, value of 2 through 6, and chroma of 2 through 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--silt loam or silty clay loam

C horizon:
Color--hue of 2.5YR through 2.5Y, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 1 through 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--silty clay loam or silt loam

COMPETING SERIES:
Morristown soils--Morristown soils are formed in regolith consisting mostly of limestone and calcareous shale with some medium-grained sandstone and siltstone with no one rock type making up more than 65 percent of the total. Also, the Morristown soils allow textures of loam, silt loam, sandy clay loam, clay loam and silty clay loam in the particle-size control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landscape: Hills
Landform: Hillslope
Anthropogenic Features: Surface mine, spoil bank, spoil pile and reclaimed land
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, backslope, footslope and toeslope
Geomorphic Component: Interfluve, side slope, head slope, nose slope, free face and base slope
Parent Material: Coal extraction mine spoil derived from calcareous regolith of greater than 65 percent mudstone with small amounts of sandstone, limestone, siltstone and shale
Slope: 0 to 90 percent
Mean Annual Air Temperature: 9 to 13 degrees C. (48 to 56 degrees F.)
Mean Annual Precipitation: 1016 to 1143 mm (40 to 45 inches)

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
Gilpin soils--formed in residuum from shale, siltstone and sandstone on undisturbed uplands
Upshur soils--formed in residuum from shale and siltstone on undisturbed uplands
Westmoreland soils--formed in residuum from siltstone, sandstone and limestone on undisturbed uplands
Vandalia soils--formed in colluvium from shale, siltstone and sandstone on undisturbed uplands
Ernest soils--formed in colluvium from shale, siltstone, and sandstone on undisturbed uplands
Clarksburg soils--formed in colluvium from limestone, shale and sandstone on undisturbed uplands

DRAINAGE AND SATURATED HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY:
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Well drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: None
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Very high
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity: Low through moderately high in the upper part, and very low through moderately high in the lower part
Shrink-Swell Potential: Low

USE AND VEGETATION:
Major Uses: Wildlife habitat and recreational areas. The rough topography and coarse fragment content of unreclaimed areas make it impractical for agriculture and difficult for standard forest harvesting practices. Some reclaimed areas are used for hay or pasture, and increasingly, are also used for homesites. Reclaimed areas typically exhibit higher bulk densities, much lower saturated hydraulic conductivities and low organic matter in the surface horizon, making establishment of vegetation difficult.
Dominant Vegetation: Unreclaimed areas are naturally seeded deciduous forests with a few barren areas. Reclaimed areas are usually open grassland, including some legumes. A few reclaimed areas have been planted to trees, but mortality is high because of soil compaction.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Distribution: West Virginia
Extent: Moderate

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: MORGANTOWN, WEST VIRGINIA

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Lewis County, West Virginia, 1988

REMARKS: Janelew soils were previously mapped as a variety of strip mine spoil and udorthents units.

Diagnostic horizons and soil characteristics recognized in this pedon are:
Ochric epipedon--the zone from 0 to 8 cm (A horizon)
Series control section--the zone from 0 to 200 cm
Mudstone rock fragments make up 65 percent or more of the total rock fragment content in the particle-size control section.

Previous revisions: 1/06-REP,LDS,JCL

ADDITIONAL DATA: Complete characterization and related data was obtained on 25 pedons of Janelew soils by Dr. John Sencindiver, Jeff Thomas, and Paul Hnottavange, West Virginia University. Characterization data can be accessed by Thomas' and Hnottavange's theses.

________________________________________
National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
