LOCATION JANNEY                 FL

Established Series
Rev. GWH; GRB
10/2018

JANNEY SERIES

The Janney series consists of moderately deep, poorly drained, moderately permeable soils in flatwoods and low hammocks of western peninsular Florida.  They formed in sandy marine sediments over limestone bedrock.  Near the type location, the mean annual temperature is about 72 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 55 inches.  Slopes are less than 2 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy, siliceous, hyperthermic Typic Alaquods

TYPICAL PEDON:  Janney fine sand--of tame pasture. (Colors are for moist soil)

    Ap--0 to 8 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) fine sand; many gray (10YR 5/1) uncoated sand grains; weak fine granular structure; very friable; common fine and medium roots; extremely acid; abrupt wavy boundary (3 to 9 inches thick).

    E--8 to 14 inches; gray (10YR 5/1) fine sand; single grained; loose; common fine and medium roots; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

    Eg--14 to 20 inches; gray (10YR 6/1) fine sand; few fine prominent very dark brown (10YR 2/2) streaks and pockets and many prominent gray (10YR 6/1) oval areas of depletions; single grained; loose; few fine roots; strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary (combined thickness of the E and Eg horizons ranges from 4 to 27 inches).

    Bh1--20 to 24 inches; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) fine sand; sand grains are well coated with colloidal organic matter; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

    Bh2--24 to 27 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) fine sand; sand grains are coated with colloidal organic matter; weak fine subangular blocky structure; very friable; few fine roots; moderately acid; abrupt irregular boundary (total thickness of the Bh horizon ranges from 2 to 10 inches).

    R--27+ inches; Limestone bedrock that can be dug with light power machinery.

TYPE LOCATION:  Levy County, Florida.  Approximately 1,500 feet north and 1,100 feet east of the southwest corner of Sec. 19, T. 13 S., R. 14 E.  UTM coordinates X0310534; Y3245460.  Elevation is 33 ft MSL.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness and depth to bedrock ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Reaction ranges from extremely acid to slightly acid in the A and E horizons and from extremely acid in the upper part of the Bh horizon to neutral in the lower part of the Bh horizon.  Reaction in any BC, C or Bt horizon ranges from slightly acid to mildly alkaline.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 2 to 4, and chroma of 1 or 2.  Texture is sand or fine sand.

The E and Eg horizons have hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 to 7, and chroma of 1 or 2.  Texture is sand or fine sand.

The Bh horizon has hue of 5Yr to 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 1 to 4.  Texture is sand, fine sand or loamy fine sand.

In some pedons, a thin, discontinuous Bt horizon is immediately above the bedrock in solution holes.  Where present this layer has color similar to that of the C horizon and has texture of sandy loam or fine sandy loam.  

A BC horizon occurs below the Bh horizon in some pedons.  Where present, it has hue of 10YR to 2.5Y, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 3 or less.  Texture is sand, fine sand or loamy fine sand.

A C horizon occurs just above the bedrock in some pedons.  Where present, it has the same range of colors and textures as the BC horizon.    

The R horizon is composed of limestone bedrock having varying degrees of hardness.  Commonly, it can be chipped, but not dug with a hand spade, but can be dug fairly easily with power machinery.  In some areas, the limestone occurs as a ledge, ranging from about 12 to 30 inches in thickness, and is underlain by material similar in color and texture to that of the C horizon.

COMPETING SERIES:  There include the Estero, Ona, and St. Johns series in the same family.  All of these soils are very deep.  The very poorly drained Estero soils are in lower tidal marsh areas.  Ona soils are on similar positions.  The very poorly or poorly drained St. Johns soils are on similar to slightly lower positions. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Janney soils are in areas of broad flats or low hammocks in western peninsular Florida.  Slopes range from 0 to 1 percent.  They formed in moderately deep sandy marine sediments that overlie limestone.  The climate is humid subtropical.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 50 to 60 inches and the average annual temperature ranges from 70 to 74 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Basinger, Boca, EauGallie, Hallandale, Holopaw, Immokalee, Myakka, Smyrna and Wabasso series.  All of these soils are very poorly or poorly drained and are on similar to slightly lower positions.  Basinger, Boca, Hallandale and Holopaw soils do not have spodic horizons.  In addition, Basinger and Holopaw soils are very deep while Holopaw and Boca soils have argillic horizons.  Hallandale soils are shallow to limestone bedrock.  EauGallie, Immokalee, Myakka, Smyrna and Wabasso soils are very deep.  In addition, EauGallie and Wabasso soils have argillic horizons.    

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained; moderate permeability.  

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of Janney soils are used as pasture, wildlife habitat, native forest or are planted to pine.  Some areas near the southern parts of the series range are used for citrus production.  The natural vegetation typically consists of an overstory of slash pine, oaks, cabbage palm, black gum and sweet gum with sawpalmetto, gallberry, blueberry, bluestems, pineland threeawn, and a variety of other grasses and forbs in the understory.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Mainly in the central and southern parts of western peninsular Florida.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Auburn, Alabama.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Levy County, Florida; 1990.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:

Ochric epipedon - the zone extending from the surface to a depth of 20 inches (Ap, E and Eg horizons).

Albic horizon - the zone from 8 to 20 inches (E and Eg horizons).

Spodic horizon - the zone from 20 to 27 inches (Bh1 and Bh2 horizons).

Moderately deep feature - at a depth of 27 inches (R horizon).

The water table is within a depth of 6 to 18 inches for 1 to 4 months during most years and recedes below the bedrock surface during the drier months.

Soils of the Janney series were previously mapped as Broward Variant in Manatee County, Florida.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
