LOCATION JAREALES               PR

Established Series
Rev. GA
08/2000

JAREALES SERIES

The Jareales series consists of deep, poorly drained soils formed in fine textured sediments of mixed origin over decomposed organic materials.  They are nearly level soils in the coastal lowlands.  These soils have clayey, mottled A horizons and gleyed, plastic clay  B horizons over decomposed organic materials.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, superactive, nonacid, isohyperthermic Thapto-Histic Fluvaquents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Jareales clay - Sugarcane.
                (Colors are for moist soil.)

     Ap--0 to 6 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay, with few fine faint dark brown (7.5YR 4/4) mottles, weak medium subangular blocky structure, parting to moderate medium granular; firm, slightly sticky, plastic, many fine roots; neutral; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

     B1--6 to 13 inches; black (10YR 2/1) clay, with yellowish red (5YR 4/8) in root channels and few fine faint yellowish brown (10YR 5/5) mottles; moderate medium and coarse subangular blocky structure with few pressure faces; firm, slightly sticky, plastic; common fine roots neutral; gradual wavy boundary.  (6 to 8 inches thick)

     B21g--13 to 20 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay with yellowish red (5YR 4/8) in root channels and many medium olive (5Y 5/3) and few fine prominent greenish gray (5GY 5/1) mottles, weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure with few pressure faces; firm, slightly sticky, plastic; few fine roots; neutral; gradual wavy boundary.  (5 to 9 inches thick)

     B22g--20 to 28 inches; olive gray (5Y 5/2) clay and strong brown (7.5YR 5/5) with few fine faint greenish gray (5GY 5/1) mottles; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; firm, slightly sticky, plastic; decayed roots; neutral; abrupt smooth boundary.  (6 to 10 inches thick)

     Oa1--28 to 60 inches; black (N 2/0) broken face and rubbed colors; less than 5 percent fiber massive; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; low mineral content; slightly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Atlantico SCD, Puerto Rico, 1,150 meters north of kilometer marker 2.4 on Highway 682.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the solum and depth to the organic horizon varies from 21 to 35 inches.  Texture of solum is clay.  Consistence of solum is slightly sticky or sticky and plastic.  Reaction of the solum is slightly to mildly alkaline.  The mean annual soil temperature is 76 degrees F.

The A horizon has hues of 10YR, values of 2 and 3, and chromas of 1 or 2.  Dark brown and yellowish mottles are usually present.  Structure is weak fine or medium subangular blocky which may part to granular.

The B1 horizon has hues of 10YR, values of 2 and 3, and chromas of 1 or 2.  High chroma mottles may be present.

The gley B2 horizons have hues of 10YR to 5Y, values of 2 to 5, and chromas of 1 or 2.  Structure is weak fine to coarse subangular blocky.  Pressure faces may or may not be present.

The organic layer consists of black, highly decomposed materials with less than 5 percent fiber.

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Reparada series in the same family.  The Bajura, Coloso, Corcega, Fortuna, Igualdad, Maunabo, Perchas, Pinones, Santoni, Talante and Vayas series are similar soils in related family.  The Reparada soils have an ustic moisture regime.  All of these soils, except, Pinones lack underlying organic layers.  The Pinones soils are acid throughout the profile.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Jareales soils are nearly level soils in the coastal lowlands with slope gradients of 0 to 2 percent.  They formed in clay sediments of mixed origin overlying decomposed organic materials.  The climate is humid.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 60 to 70 inches.  The mean annual termperature is 77 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Bajura, Coloso, and Vigia series.  The Vigia soils have organic surface layers over mineral layers.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained, runoff slow, permeability is very slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Sugarcane and pasture.  These soils are used for sugarcane when drained.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern coastal areas of Puerto Rico.  The series is of minor extent with about 1,850 acres.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Arecibo Soil Survey Area, Puerto Rico; 1980.  National Cooperative Soil Survey
U. S. A.


