LOCATION JAYNES                 AZ

Established Series
Rev. MLR/SJL/PDC/WWJ
09/2006

JAYNES SERIES

The Jaynes series consists of very deep, well drained soils formed in mixed alluvium from gneiss and schist.  Jaynes soils are on relict fan terraces and have slopes of 2 to 8 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 11 inches and the mean annual air temperature is about 68 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, superactive, calcareous, thermic Duric Torriorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Jaynes gravelly sandy loam - rangeland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted).

    A--0 to 5 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) gravelly sandy loam, dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) moist; weak moderate platy structure parting to weak fine granular; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; many very fine and fine and few medium and coarse roots; many very fine and fine and few medium interstitial and a few medium and coarse tubular pores; 25 percent gravel; violently effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4); clear wavy boundary.  (1 to 6 inches thick)

    Bw--5 to 10 inches; pale brown (10YR 6/3) gravelly sandy loam, brown (7.5YR 5/4) moist; weak fine and medium granular structure; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; many very fine and fine and few medium roots; many very fine and fine and few medium interstitial pores and a few medium and coarse tubular pores; 25 percent gravel; violently effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4); abrupt wavy boundary.  (3 to 10 inches thick)

    2Cdk1--10 to 33 inches; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) loamy fine sand, yellowish red (5YR 4/6) moist; strong thick plates separated by calcium carbonate; very hard, firm and brittle, nonsticky and nonplastic; few very fine roots in fractures; common very fine cracks between horizontal plates; violently effervescent as calcium carbonate coatings on plates; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4); abrupt wavy boundary.  (0 to 30 inches thick)

    2Cdk2--33 to 46 inches; reddish yellow (5YR 6/6) loamy fine sand, yellowish red (5YR 4/6) moist; massive; very hard, firm and brittle, nonsticky and nonplastic; few very fine roots in fractures; common very fine tubular pores; slightly effervescent in spots as pinkish white (7.5YR 8/2) fine and medium calcium carbonate veins; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); abrupt broken boundary.  (0 to 30 inches thick)

    3Cd--46 to 60 inches; pinkish white (5YR 8/2) loamy fine sand, light reddish brown (5YR 6/4) moist; massive; extremely hard, extremely firm and brittle, nonsticky and nonplastic; few very fine roots in fractures; many very fine and few fine medium tubular pores; many very fine and few fine and medium tubular pores; violently effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4).

TYPE LOCATION:  Pima County, Arizona; Intersection of Sunset Road and La Canada Blvd. in a road cut on the north side of the street.  150 feet west of the southeast corner of section 10, T. 13 S., R. 13 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture - Intermittently moist in some part of the soil moisture control section July-August and December-January.  Driest during May and June.  Typic aridic soil moisture regime.

Soil temperature - 69 to 72 degrees F.

Rock fragments - 15 to 35 percent gravel

Depth to compacted unconsolidated sediments - 4 to 16 inches

Reaction - slightly to moderately alkaline

A horizon
Hue:  10YR, 7.5YR
Value:  5, 6, or 7 dry, 4, 5, or 6 moist
Chroma:  3 or 4, dry or moist
Organic matter:  Less than 1 percent
Calcium carbonate:  Strongly to violently effervescent

B horizon
Hue: 10YR, 7.5YR
Value:  6, 7, or 8 dry, 5, 6, or 7 moist
Chroma:  1 through 4 dry, 2, 3, or 4 moist
Texture:  fine sandy loam, sandy loam (10 to 15 percent clay)

Cd horizon
Hue: 5YR, 7.5YR
Value: 6, 7, or 8 dry, 4 through 7 moist
Chroma: 2 through 6, dry or moist
Texture: When crushed, includes coarse sandy loam, loamy coarse sand, sandy loam, loamy fine sand, fine sand, loamy sand.
Consistence:  Brittle and firm, very firm or extremely firm when moist.  Typically breaks down after prolonged soaking and shaking in water.  Roots can enter the matrix when moist but is root restrictive when dry.
Genesis:  Thought to be Pleistocene age sediments that were naturally compacted by a combination of paleo lake water loading and subsequent impregnation by calcium carbonate and low levels of silica.

COMPETING SERIES: This is the Lewkalb (CA) series. Lewkalb soils occur in the San Joaquin Valley (LRR-C MLRA 17) and are hot and dry in the summer with cool, somewhat moist winters.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Jaynes soils are on relict fan terraces with slopes of 2 to 8 percent.  They formed in fan alluvium from gneiss and schist but include other granitic and some volcanic and sedimentary rocks.  Elevations are 2200 to 3200 feet.  The mean annual precipitation is 10 to 12 inches.  The mean annual air temperature is 67 to 70 degrees F.  The frost-free period is about 240 to 280 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Anklam, Anthony, Chimenea, Continental, Hayhook, Palos Verdes, Pantano and Pinaleno soils. Anklam, Anthony, Chimenea, Continental, Hayhook, Pantano and Pinaleno soils do not have compacted layers. Palos Verdes soils have argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium or rapid runoff; moderately rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used for livestock grazing, wildlife habitat, and urban development.  The present vegetation consists of creosotebush, paloverde, triangle leaf bursage, desert zinnia, cacti, fluffgrass, bush muhly, slim tridens and mesquite.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern Arizona. This soil occurs in LRR-D, MLRA 40. The Jaynes series is not extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Pima County, Arizona, Eastern Part; 1986.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - The zone from 0 to 5 inches (A horizon)

Compacted layers - The zone from 10 to 60 inches (2Cdk1, 2Cdk2, 3Cd horizons)

Entisol feature - The absence of diagnostic subsurface horizons

Classified according to Soil Taxonomy Second Edition, 1999.

In October 2000, taxonomic classification was converted to the closest
match found in Soil Taxonomy, Second Edition 1999.  No update was made
to horizon nomenclature, competing series section, etc.  Other
placements may be more appropriate after a complete update.

Classification changed to better reflect the nature of the compacted layers.  These layers are not duripans but are intergrades between rock (paralithic) materials and unconsolidated alluvium.  They are root restrictive when dry but not restrictive when moist.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
