LOCATION JOURDANTON             TX

Established Series
CLG:JWS:GWD
02/2003

JOURDANTON SERIES

The Jourdanton series consists of deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils of uplands that have formed in loamy sediments on nearly level to gently sloping terraces of the Tertiary system.  Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, hyperthermic Aridic Paleustolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Jourdanton fine sandy loam--cropland.
       (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)
     Ap--0 to 6 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) fine sandy loam, dark
brown (10YR 3/3) moist; weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable; common fine roots; slightly acid;
abrupt smooth boundary.  (5 to 8 inches thick)

     A1--6 to 16 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) fine sandy loam, dark
brown (10YR 3/3) moist; weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable; few fine roots; few fine pores;
slightly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 12 inches thick)

     B21t--16 to 34 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) sandy clay loam, dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) moist; moderate medium prismatic structure parting to weak fine subangular blocky; hard, friable; clay bridging of sand grains; few fine roots; few fine pores; neutral; gradual smooth boundary.  (12 to 20 inches thick)

     B22t--34 to 46 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) sandy clay loam,
dark brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; moderate medium prismatic structure parting to moderate fine subangular blocky; hard, friable; patchy clay films on faces of peds; few fine roots; few fine pores and
old root channels; neutral; gradual smooth boundary.  (8 to 26
inches thick)

     B23t--46 to 62 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) sandy clay
loam, strong brown (7.5YR 4/6) moist; moderate medium prismatic structure parting to weak fine subangular blocky; hard, friable;
few patchy clay films on faces of peds; neutral; gradual smooth boundary.  (7 to 26 inches thick)

     B24t--62 to 80 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) sandy clay
loam, strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) moist; weak fine subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; few patchy clay films on faces of peds; noncalcareous; mildly alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.

TYPE LOCATION:  Atascosa County, Texas; 4.5 miles southwest of Charlotte on Texas Highway 97, then 1.0 mile south on black top county road, then 0.5 mile east on county road, then 1.0 mile
south of county road and 200 feet west of Clear Creek in
cultivated field.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 60 to 90 inches or more.  The mollic epipedon is 11 to 20 inches thick.
Depth to secondary calcium carbonate ranges from 36 to more than
60 inches.  The control section averages 18 to 32 percent clay.

The A horizon is brown, dark brown, and grayish brown in hues of
10YR and 7.5YR, values of 4 or 5, and chromas of 2 or 3.  It is slightly acid through mildly alkaline fine sandy loam or loam.

The B21t horizon is brown, strong brown, or yellowish brown in
hues of 10YR and 7.5YR, values of 5, and chromas of 2 through 4.
It is neutral to mildly alkaline fine sandy loam, loam, or sandy
clay loam.

The B22t horizon and lower horizons are brown, strong brown,
reddish yellow and yellowish red in hues of 10YR, 7.5YR, and 5YR, values of 5 or 6, and chromas of 4 through 8.  The browner and
lower chroma colors are in the upper part.  Hues redder than 10YR
and chromas more than 4 occur in some part.  It is mildly alkaline through moderately alkaline.  Texture is sandy clay loam or loam.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Caid series is the same family
and the Acuff, Amphion, Brennan, Duval, Hanis, Hargill, Motley,
and Olton series in similar families.  Acuff, Motley, and Olton
soils have mean soil temperatures less than 72 degrees F.  In addition, Acuff soils have calcic horizons.  Motley soils are
moist for longer periods, and Olton soils have over 35 percent
clay in their control sections.  Amphion and Hanis soils have
mollic epipedons over 20 inches thick and have more than 35
percent clay in their control sections.  Brennan and Duval soils
lack mollic epipedons and have thinner sola.  Caid soils are calcareous throughout and have calcic horizons.  Hargill soils are moist for longer periods and have more frost-free days.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  These soils are on nearly level to gently sloping terraces with slope gradients of 0 to 3 percent.  Surfaces are plain to convex.  These soils formed in loamy sediments of the Tertiary system.  The mean annual temperature is 70 degrees to 75 degrees F.  Average annual precipitation ranges from 20 to 30
inches and the Thornthwaite P-E index ranges from 28 to 40.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the similar
Amphion, Duval, and Hanis series, as well as the Floresville,
Miguel, and Webb series.  All of these soils occur on higher landscapes.  Floresville, Miguel and Webb soils have more than 35 percent clay in their control section.  In addition, Floresville
and Miguel soils have mottled subsoils.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow to medium runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Cropland and rangeland.  Cultivated crops are mainly small grain, grain sorghums, peanuts, watermelons and introduced grasses.  Native grasses presently include trichloris, Arizona cottontop, tanglehead, lovegrass tridens, plains bristlegrass, hooded windmillgrass, red grama and threeawn.  Woody plants include mesquite, whitebrush, blackbrush, catclaw,
guayacan, lotebush, spiny hackberry and prickleypear cactus.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern and central Rio Grande Plain.
The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Atascosa County, Texas; 1977.

REMARKS:  This soil was formerly included in the Hargill series,
but this soil is in a drier climate with fewer frost-free days.
This soil would have been formerly classified in the Chestnut
great soil group.
 National Cooperative Soil Survey
 U. S. A.


