LOCATION EBBS                   UT

Inactive Series
Rev. WGH/RCR
04/2003

EBBS SERIES

The Ebbs series includes pink or purplish tinted Alluvial soils of the Brown soils zone.  They are developed on comparatively high alluvial fans in the south central part of Utah.  The climate is semiarid, with cold winters and warm summers.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 14 to about 17 inches.  Parent rocks are mainly limestone with inclusions of sandstone and quartzite.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Fluventic Haploxerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Ebbs loam, irrigated cropland.  (Provisional soil color names proposed by 1946 committee.  Color of soil is for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

    0 to 8 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) and light brown (7.5YR 6/4) loam; soft then dry; very friable and brown (7.5YR 4/2) when moist; slightly calcareous; fine granular structure to fine crumb.  (8 to 15 inches thick)

    8 to 16 inches; light brown (10YR 6/4) loam; fine granular or fine crumb; moderately calcareous; friable and brown (7.5YR 5/4) when moist.  (8 to 12 inches thick)
    16 to 26 inches; light brown (10YR 6/4) heavy loam or loam; fine granular; friable when dry; very friable and brown (7.5YR 5/4) when moist; strongly calcareous and containing a few mycelia like veins.  10 to 20 inches thick)

    26 to 60 inches; light brownish loam; moderately calcareous but without lime veining; massive but breaks to medium or fine crumbs; brown when moist.

TYPE LOCATION:  Upper Round Valley, South of Scipio, Utah; 500 feet North of E1/4 corner, section 3, T.21S., R.2W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Texture of the profile other than surface soil ranges from silty clay loam to loamy fine sand.  The heavier textures have in most places been associated with heavier textured surface soils, medium textured soils with medium textured surface soils, and the moderately light textured subsoils with moderately light textured surface soils.  Lime veining is very faint in places.  The soils may be very uniform in texture throughout, or it may consist of several strata.

COMPETING SERIES AND THEIR DIFFERENTIAE:  This series is associated with Genola and Calita series.   These soils have less gray and more

pinkish color than the Genola soils and lack the lime developed horizon and the mottling that characterizes Calita soils.  They have characteristics somewhat similar to those of the Ackmen series, but they are not nearly so dark colored or so high in organic matter and humus.
GEOGRAPHIC SETTING;  Smooth surface, slightly undulating in places.  Slopes range from 1 to about 6 percent.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Surface and internal drainage good.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used for dry farm and irrigated crops. Vegetation is oak brush, sagebrush, and occassional junipers.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Alluvial fans and flood plains adjacent to perennial or intermittent streams.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Davis, California

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Round Valley Survery, Millard County, S.C.S., Utah.

REMARKS:
The superactive cation exchange activity class was added in 03/2003 to the taxonomic classification by the National Soil Survey Center on request of the Reno MLRA office, without review of the soil series property data. The remainder of this document has not been updated.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
