LOCATION EGAM                   TN+AL AR KY VA

Established Series
Rev. RPS:JCJ
04/2001

EGAM SERIES

The Egam series consists of very deep, well drained or moderately well drained soils that formed in clayey alluvium on flood plains and in depressions. Slopes are dominantly less than 2 percent but range from 0 to 5 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, active, thermic Cumulic Hapludolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Egam silty clay loam--pasture. (Colors are for moist soil.)

Ap--0 to 7 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) silty clay loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 10 inches thick)

A--7 to 22 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silty clay loam; strong medium angular blocky structure, some medium prismatic structure that parts to angular blocky; firm; many fine roots; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to 30 inches thick)

Bw1--22 to 39 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silty clay, few fine faint grayish brown mottles; weak medium prismatic structure parting to strong medium angular blocky; very firm; common fine roots largely between peds, few fine roots within peds; pressure faces on some peds; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (0 to 30 inches thick)

Bw2--39 to 56 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) silty clay;strong medium angular blocky structure; firm; common fine roots; pressure faces on some peds; common fine and medium faint dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) redox depletions; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

Bw3--56 to 75 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) silty clay loam;moderate medium angular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots;common medium and fine faint dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) redox depletions; slightly acid.  (Combined thickness of the Bw horizon below the mollic epipedon ranges from 20 to 55 inches)

TYPE LOCATION:  Davidson County, Tennessee; Tennessee State University farm; northwest corner of farm, 200 feet south of Cumberland River and 150 feet west of rock fence.USGS topo Quad: (unknown), latitude: (unknown); longitude (unknown).

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Depth to bedrock is greater than 60 inches.  Thickness of the mollic epipedon ranges from 24 to 55 inches.  Reaction is neutral to moderately acid in the A and B horizon, below about 50 inches it ranges from moderately alkaline to moderately acid.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Some pedons have a few faint gray and brown mottles in the lower part.  Texture is dominantly silty clay loam or silt loam but a few pedons are loam or silty clay.

The upper part of the Bw horizon is part of the mollic epipedon and in some pedons has colors like the A horizon.  Below this, the Bw horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 3 to 6.  Redox features is shades of brown or gray are few to common and those with chroma 1 or 2 range from none to common.

Below about 50 inches, the Bw horizon or C horizon, where present, has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 4 to 6 and chroma of 1 to 6.  Redox features are in shades of brown and gray and some pedons are mottled without a dominant matrix color.  Texture is dominantly silty clay loam, silty clay or clay, but some pedons range to clay loam or coarser.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Frioton series in the same family.  Similar soils are the Agee, Arrington, Bowdre, Cannon, Catalpa, Godwin, Lanton, and Staser series in closely related families.  Frioton soils have free carbonates in the solum.  Arrington soils are fine-silty and Cannon and Staser soils are fine-loamy.  Bowdre and Catalpa soils have mollic epipedons less than 20 inches thick. Agee, Godwin, and Lanton soils are more poorly drained. They have distinct or prominent gray mottles in the mollic epipedon or dominantly gray colors just below the mollic epipedon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Egam soils are on flood plains and in depressions.  Slopes are most commonly 0 to 2 percent and range from 0 to about 5 percent.  The soil formed in fine-textured alluvium.  Near the type location average annual air temperature is about 59 degrees F., and average annual precipitation is about 47.3 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the similar Arrington, Agee, Godwin, Lanton, and Staser series and the Lynnville series which is fine-silty.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained or moderately well drained; slow runoff; moderately slow permeability.  Most areas are flooded for very brief periods.  The flooding is rare to frequent.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Nearly all areas are cleared and used chiefly for growing corn, soybeans, cotton, hay, and pasture.  The original vegetation was hardwood forest, chiefly of oaks, maple, elm, gums, ash, sycamore, beech, and hickory.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Nashville Basin and Great Valley regions of Tennessee, northwestern Georgia, northern Alabama, Arkansas, and Kentucky. The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Lincoln County, Tennessee; 1938.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons recognized in this pedon are: Mollic epipedon - 0 to 39 inches (Ap, A, Bw1 horizons) Cambic horizon - 39 to 75 inches (Bw1, Bw2, Bw3 horizons)

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
