LOCATION ELLISVILLE             AL+TN

Established Series
Rev. CFM:GWH,SWA
04/2001

ELLISVILLE SERIES

The Ellisville series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils that formed in loamy and silty alluvium from sandstone, shale, and limestone.  These soils are on nearly level flood plains, and low stream terraces.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, active, thermic Dystric Fluventic Eutrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Ellisville silty clay loam--cultivated.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 6 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) silty clay loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; common fine roots; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 16 inches thick)

     Bw1--6 to 14 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) silty clay loam; weak granular and weak medium subangular blocky structure; very friable; few fine roots; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bw2--14 to 29 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) silty clay loam; weak and moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few medium roots; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bw3--29 to 52 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) silty clay loam; weak and moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few medium roots; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bw4--52 to 75 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) silt loam with common medium distinct light yellowish brown and brown mottles; weak medium subangular blocky structure; very friable; very strongly acid.  (Combined thickness of the B horizon is 40 to more than 60 inches.)

TYPE LOCATION:  Cherokee County, Alabama; about 30 feet west of Terrapin Creek bridge on the Centre-Hokes Bluff Road, 50 yards NE of Terrapin Creek, SE1/4NW1/4 of sec. 34, T. 10 S., R. 9 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 45 to 80 inches.  Reaction of the soil ranges from slightly acid to very strongly acid except for the surface in limed areas.  Thickness of epipedon with chroma 2 or 3 and value of 3 is less than 10 inches.

The A horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 through 6, and chroma of 2 through 4.  Texture is silty clay loam, silt loam, loam, or sandy loam.

The Bw horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 3 or 4.  Mottles in shades of brown or gray below depths of about 24 inches range from none to many.  Some pedons have buried subhorizons within the Bw horizon that has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Texture of the Bw horizon is silty clay loam or silt loam.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no known series in the same family.  Competing series in related families are the Hannahatchee, Keo, Lindell, Monacan, Ocana, and Tuckahoe series.  Hannahatchee, Lindell, Monacan, Ocana, and Tuckahoe soils have more than 15 percent fine and coarser sand in their control sections; in
addition, Lindell and Monacan soils have mottles of chroma 2 or less within 24 inches of the surface.  Keo soils have less than 18 percent clay in the control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Ellisville soils are on level or nearly level flood plains and low stream terraces.  Slopes range from 0 to 2 percent.  The regolith is alluvium from sandstone, shale, and limestone uplands.  Average annual rainfall is 55 inches near the type location.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the Armour, Chewacla, Choccolocco, McQueen, Steadman, Toccoa, and Wickham series.  Chewacla and Steadman soils contain redox depletions of chroma 2 or less in the upper 24 inches of the solum.  Armour, McQueen, Choccolocco, and Wickham soils have argillic horizons.  Toccoa soils have less than 18 percent clay in the control section.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  These soils are well drained.  Runoff is moderate and permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Corn, soybeans, cotton, woodland.  Forested areas are chiefly hardwoods, dominated by oaks, hickories, beech, and elm.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Southern Appalachian Valley of Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, and the Highland Rim of Tennessee.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Cherokee County, Alabama; 1973.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
