LOCATION ELROSE                 TX

Established Series
DDR:CLN:GLL; Rev.JDS
10/2004

ELROSE SERIES

The Elrose series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils on uplands. They formed in marine sediments high in glauconite. Slopes range from 1 to 12 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, semiactive, thermic Typic Paleudalfs

TYPICAL PEDON: Elrose fine sandy loam--pasture. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

 A1--0 to 2 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) fine sandy loam; weak fine and medium granular structure; soft, very friable; many fine and medium roots; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

 A2--2 to 13 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) fine sandy loam; weak medium and coarse granular structure; soft, very friable; common fine and medium roots; few pebbles up to 5 mm in diameter; common soft black concretions; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary. (combined thickness of the A horizons is 4 to 18 inches thick)

 Bt1--13 to 19 inches; red (2.5YR 4/6) loam; moderate fine and medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; common fine and medium roots; discontinuous clay films on ped faces and bridging of sand grains; few pebbles up to 5 mm in diameter; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary. (4 to 14 inches thick)

 Bt2--19 to 26 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; common fine and medium roots; continuous clay films on ped faces; few pebbles up to 5 mm in diameter; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary. (6 to 24 inches thick)

 Bt3--26 to 35 inches; red (10R 4/6) clay loam; moderate medium and coarse subangular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; few fine and medium roots; continuous clay films on ped faces and along root channels; few pebbles 5 to 15 mm in diameter; few fine and medium fragments of yellowish weathered glauconitic material up to 1 cm in diameter; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary. (6 to 36 inches thick)

 Bt4--35 to 53 inches; red (10R 4/8) clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; discontinuous clay films on ped faces and bridging of sand grains; few pebbles up to 5 mm in diameter; few fine soft black masses; few fine fragments of yellowish weathered glauconitic material up to 5 mm in diameter; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary. (0 to 30 inches thick)

 Bt5--53 to 80 inches; red (2.5YR 4/8) clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; discontinuous clay films on ped faces and bridging of sand grains; few pebbles up to 5 mm in diameter; few fine soft black masses; few fine fragments of yellowish weathered glauconitic material up to 5 mm in diameter; few areas of yellowish red (5YR 5/8) sandy loam material surrounding pebbles; slightly acid.

TYPE LOCATION: Smith County, Texas; from the intersection of Farm Road 16 and County Road 431 in Lindale; northwest 6.8 miles on County Road 431; west 0.8 mile on County Road 452; south 0.2 mile on County Road 445; south 0.2 mile on County Road 482; 200 feet east in pasture.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Solum thickness: 60 to more than 80 inches
Clay content in the Control Section: 25 to 35 percent
Redoximorphic features: Relic iron concentrations that are not due to contemporary wetness are in the lower part of the epipedon and subsoil layers.
Other distinctive soil features: Depth to a layer with clay content greater than 35 percent ranges from 20 to about 40 inches. 
Concentrated minerals: The base saturation at a depth of 72 inches ranges from 35 to 75 percent. Ironstone pebbles range from none to 35 percent by volume in the A horizon and less than 10 percent in the argillic horizon. Some pedons contain a few fragments of petrified wood, glauconitic ironstone, ironstone or fossilized shells.

A horizon:
Color--Hue of 2.5YR to 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 to 6
Redoximorphic features--None
Texture--Loamy fine sand, fine sandy loam or their gravelly counterparts
Other features--None
Reaction--Very strongly acid to slightly acid unless limed

E or EB horizon:  (where present)
Color--Hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6 and chroma of 3 or 4
Redoximorphic features--Relic iron concentrations with chroma of 6 or 8 range from none to common
Texture--Loamy fine sand, fine sandy loam or their gravelly counterparts
Other features--None
Reaction--Very strongly acid to slightly acid unless limed    

Upper part of the Bt horizon:
Color--Hue of 10R to 5YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 4 to 8
Redoximorphic features--None
Texture--Loam, sandy clay loam or clay loam with clay content of 15 to 30 percent
Other features--None
Reaction--Very strongly acid to slightly acid

Lower part of the Bt horizon:
Color--Hue of 10R to 5YR, value of 3 to 6, and chroma of 6 or 8
Redoximorphic features--Relic iron concentrations range from none to many in shades of red, yellow or brown
Texture--clay loam, sandy clay or clay. Clay content ranges from 30 to 55 percent and is greater than 35 percent in some part. Some pedons have sandy clay loam or loam textures below a depth of 60 inches.
Other features--Weathered glauconitic materials in spots or fragments range from few to common in some part of most pedons. Some pedons have a few streaks of clean sand in the lower part.
Reaction--Very strongly acid to slightly acid

2BC or 2C horizon:  (where present)
Color--Shades of red, brown or gray
Redoximorphic features--None
Texture--Clay loam, silty clay or clay
Other features--Depth to a 2BC or 2C horizon is more than 60 inches.
Reaction--Very strongly acid to moderately acid    

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Attoyac, Caledonia, Darbonne, Petal and Sallisaw series in the same family and the Kamie, Larue, Redsprings, Ruston, Trawick, Vesey, Whakana, and Woden soils in similar families. The Attoyac and Caledonia soils do not have a clayey lower Bt horizon and in addition Caledonia soils have 30 percent or more silt in the upper Bt horizon. Darbonne soils have 15 to 60 percent ironstone fragments in some subhorizon of the argillic horizon and have a B/C horizon with 30 to 50 percent soft sandstone. Petal soils have brown lower Bt horizons and do not have weathered glauconitic materials. Sallisaw soils have very gravelly lower B horizons. Kamie and Vesey soils have mixed mineralogy. Larue soils have arenic epipedons. Redsprings and Trawick soils have clayey Bt horizons. Ruston and Whakana soils have 5 percent or more albic materials in the lower Bt horizon. Woden soils have coarse-loamy control sections.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Elrose soils occur on gently sloping to strongly sloping uplands in the western part of the Southern Coastal Plain. Slope gradients range from 1 to 12 percent but are dominantly less than 6 percent. The soils developed in stratified sediments of marine origin that contain a high content of glauconite mainly from the Weches Geologic Formation. Average annual temperature ranges from 64 to 67 degrees F. Frost free days range from 235 to 270. Elevation ranges from 350 to 750 feet above sea level. The annual average rainfall ranges from 39 to 48 inches and the Thornthwaite P-E index is about 68.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the competing Larue, Redsprings and Woden soils and the Alto, Bub, Cuthbert, Kirvin, and Nacogdoches soils. Larue soils are on similar or slightly higher positions. Redsprings are above on hills and low ridges. Woden soils are on lower stream terraces. Bub, Cuthbert, Kirvin, and Nacogdoches have clayey control sections. Alto soils have brownish horizons and are in lower wetter positions. Bub, Cuthbert, Kirvin and Nacogdoches soils are above on hills and low ridges.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained; low to medium runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION: Most of the Elrose soils are used for pastureland or woodland. A few areas are cropped to corn, oats, peanuts, peas, and hay. Native vegetation is mixed pine and oak forests consisting of shortleaf pine, Southern red oaks, and sweetgum.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Eastern Texas and possibly Louisiana. The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Anderson County, Texas; 1970.

REMARKS: The Elrose series was formerly included in the Magnolia series.  The series was updated in 2004 to specify that the iron concentrations are relic, and to allw them to range to many in the lower parts of the Bt horizon.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to a depth of 13 inches (the A1 & A2 horizons).

Argillic horizon - the zone from a depth of 13 to 80 inches (the Bt1 through the Bt5 horizons).

ADDITIONAL DATA: TAMU Lab No. S84TX203-001; THD Lab Nos. S84TX203-005, S85TX203-001; NSSL Lab. No. S83TX203-002.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
