LOCATION ERRAMOUSPE             NM

Established Series
Rev. PGM/CDH/WMR
01/2003

ERRAMOUSPE SERIES

The Erramouspe series consists of moderately deep, well drained, slowly permeable soils that formed in residuum and colluvial-alluvial material weathered from igneous rocks.  Erramouspe soils are on steep and very steep mountainsides.  Slopes are 20 to 60 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 17 inches and mean annual temperature is about 54 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, superactive, mesic Aridic Haplustalfs

TYPICAL PEDON: Erramouspe stony loam--on a steep mountainside--rangeland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

     Oi--0 to 2 inches; undecomposed organic matter consisting principally of leaves, twigs, and bark.  (1 or 2 inches thick)

     A--2 to 7 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) stony loam, black (10YR 2/1) moist; moderate fine granular structure; soft, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many roots; many pores; slightly alkaline (pH 7.8); clear wavy boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

     Bt1--7 to 11 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/2) clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, sticky and slightly plastic; common roots; common pores; few faint clay films on faces of peds; slightly alkaline (pH 7.6); clear wavy boundary.  (3 to 6 inches thick)

     Bt2--11 to 37 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) clay loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/4) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, very friable, sticky and plastic; few roots; common pores; few faint clay films on faces of peds; slightly alkaline (pH 7.6); abrupt smooth boundary.  (13 to 26 inches thick)

     R--37 inches; hard slightly fractured felsite bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION: Lincoln County, New Mexico; in the northwest quarter of section 5, T.1S., R.11E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture: An ustic moisture regime bordering on aridic.  The soil moisture control section is moist in all parts during the 60 days following the winter solstice.  It is moist in some part less than 40 percent and moist in all parts less than 25 percent of the time when the soil temperature at 20 inches is above 41 degrees F
Soil temperature - 54 to 58 degrees F.
Depth to bedrock - 20 to 40 inches
Depth to base of argillic horizon - 20 to 40 inches
Reaction - neutral to slightly alkaline 
Particle size control section weighted averages: - 
Silicate clay content: 35 to 50 percent 

A horizon
Value: 3 or 4 dry, 2 or 3 moist
Rock fragments: 35 to 60 percent

Bt horizons
Hue: 2.5YR to 7.5YR
Value: 4 or 5 dry, 3 or 4 moist
Chroma: 2 to 4 dry or moist
Texture: clay loam or clay
Rock fragments: 0 to 30 percent
Other features: A calcareous zone may occur in some pedons around 37 inches.

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Fikel, Hosta, Montecito, Nogal, Paguate, Prater, Teco, Tinian and Wilmac series.
Fikel, Hosta, Montecito, Prater and Teco soils are very deep.
Nogal soils are moderately deep to a paralithic contact.
Paguate soils have a calcic horizon.
Tinian soils are weathered from sandstone, have secondary carbonates in the 
  lower part of the argillic horizon, and are less moist in the late spring and 
  early summer (May and June) in the soil moisture control section.
Wilmac soils are moderately deep to a paralithic contact.
Similar soils without an assigned CEC Activity Class are the Durango, Hualapai and Jacee series.
Durango soils are very deep.
Hualapai and Jacee soils are moderately deep to a paralithic contact.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Erramouspe soils are on mountain sideslopes.  They formed in residuum and colluvial-alluvial material weathered mostly from felsite.  Slopes are 20 to 60 percent.  Elevation ranges from 6,600 to 7,600 feet.  The mean annual precipitation is 16 to 18 inches.  The mean annual air temperature is 52 to 56 degrees F.  The frost-free period is 120 to 160 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Pinata, Stroupe, Tecolote, and Wilcoxson soils.  Pinata soils are clayey-skeletal and have a lithic contact at depths greater than 40 inches.  Stroupe soils are clayey-skeletal and have a mollic epipedon.  Tecolote soils are loamy-skeletal and have a frigid temperature regime.  Wilcoxson soils have a mollic epipedon and a frigid temperature regime.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained.  Slow permeability.  Surface runoff is very high.

USE AND VEGETATION: Erramouspe soils are used for livestock grazing, wildlife habitat, recreation and watershed protection.  Native vegetation is oneseed juniper, two-needle pinyon, Gambel oak, blue grama, sideoats grama, mountain muhly and Arizona fescue.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Erramouspe soils are of small extent in central New Mexico.  The MLRA is 70.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona.

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Torrance Area soil survey, New Mexico, 1962.  Erramouspe is a local place name of a mountain peak.  

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - 2 to 7 inches (A horizon)

Argillic horizon - 7 to 37 inches (Bt horizons)

Lithic contact - The presence of hard felsite bedrock at 37 inches.  (R layer)

Reclassified according to Soil Taxonomy Second Edition, 1999.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
