LOCATION LA LANDE               NM

Established Series
Rev. RAH-ACT
11/2000

LA LANDE SERIES

The La Lande series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately
permeable soils that formed in calcareous mixed sediments. These soils are on terraces, hills, alluvial fans and piedmont slopes. Slope ranges from 0 to 8 percent. Mean annual precipitation is about 14 inches and mean annual air temperature is about 60 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, thermic Ustic Haplocambids

TYPICAL PEDON: La Lande loam - rangeland. (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

    A--0 to 4 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) moist; weak fine granular structure and weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many fine roots; many very fine pores; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary. (3 to 7 inches thick)

    Bw1--4 to 9 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) moist; weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many fine roots; many very fine and fine pores; few clusters of fine worm casts; slightly alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.

    Bw2--9 to 17 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) loam, (reddish brown (5YR 4/4) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many fine roots; many very fine and fine pores; common clusters of fine worm casts; few fine pebbles; few calcium carbonate accumulations and thin calcium carbonate coatings on undersides of pebbles; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary. (Combined thickness of Bw horizons is 10 to 35 inches)

Bk1--17 to 24 inches; light reddish brown (5YR 6/4) loam, reddish brown (5YR 5/4) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine roots; many very fine, few fine pores; few clusters of fine worm casts; few fine pebbles; common fine and medium calcium carbonate masses and thin coatings on all sides of pebbles; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary. (7 to 12 inches thick)

    Bk2--24 to 60 inches; light reddish brown (5YR 6/4) loam, reddish brown (5YR 5/4) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few fine roots; common very fine and fine pores; few fine pebbles; common fine and medium calcium carbonate accumulations and thin coatings on pebbles, calcium carbonate decreases with increasing depth; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION: Guadalupe County, New Mexico; about 31 miles east of Santa Rosa, 30 feet west and 500 feet south of the northeast corner, sec. 11, T. 8 N., R. 26 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil Temperature: 59 to 63 degrees F.

Soil Moisture: These soils are intermittently moist December through February and June through September. The driest periods are in the fall and spring.

Calcium Carbonate Equivalent: less than 15 percent, noneffervescent in upper 10 inches in some pedons.

A horizon:
Hue: 2.5YR to 7.5YR
Value: 4 to 6 dry, 3 to 5 moist
Chroma: 4 to 6
Texture: loam or fine sandy loam

B horizon:
Hue: 2.5YR to 7.5YR
Value: 3 to 7 dry, 3 to 5 moist
Chroma: 4 to 6
Texture: loam, sandy clay loam, or clay loam and has a weighted average of
18 to 35 percent clay
Rock fragments: less than 15 percent

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Hooks (AZ) and Tenneco (AZ) series. Similar soils are the Alama, Ima, and La Fonda series.

Hooks series: receive winter precipitation, support a distinctively
different vegetative community, and developed in alluvial deposits.
Tenneco series: have mean annual soil temperatures that average from 3 to 7

degrees warmer, occur at lower elevations, are dominated by hue of 10YR in the majority of pedons, and support a distinctively different vegetative community.
Alama series: have less than 15 percent fine and coarser sandy in the particle-size control section.
Ima series: contain less than 18 percent clay in the particle -size control section. La Fonda series: have mean annual soil temperatures less than 59 degrees F (mesic).

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The La Lande soil occurs on terraces, hills, alluvial fans and piedmont slopes. Slopes range from 0 to 8 percent. They formed calcareous mixed sediments derived principally from "redbed" formations of Jurassic, Triassic, Permian, and Pennsylvanian Age. Mean annual precipitation ranges from 12 to 15 inches, with a marked summer maximum characterized by heavy thunderstorms of short duration. Mean annual temperature ranges from 58 to 61 degrees F. The frost-free period ranges from 180 to 200 days and elevation ranges from 4,200 to 5,300 feet.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the competing Alama soils and the Hassell, Montoya, Quay and Tucumcari soils. The Hassell and Tucumcari soils have argillic horizons. The Montoya soils contain more than 35 percent clay in the control section. The Quay soils have calcic horizons within 40 inches of the surface.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained. Permeability is moderate . Runoff is negligible on slopes less than 1 percent, very low on 1 to 3 percent slopes, low on 3 to 5 percent slopes, and medium on 5 to 8 percent slopes.

USE AND VEGETATION: Principal use is rangeland but where water is available these soils are used for irrigated cropland. Present vegetation is primarily blue grama, bush muhly, and galleta, with some cholla and yucca.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: East-central New Mexico. It is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Southwest Quay Area, New Mexico, 1958.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - 0 to 4 inches. (A horizon).

Cambic horizon - 4 to 17 inches. (Bw horizon).

Taxonomic version: Keys to Soil Taxonomy, Eighth Edition, 1998

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
