LOCATION LAGROSS                NY

Established Series
LMcD-JWW
02/2000

LAGROSS SERIES

The Lagross series consists of deep, well drained soils formed in water-sorted material dominated by shale fragments.  They are nearly level to moderately steep permeable soils on alluvial fans and outwash terraces.  Lagross soils typically have dark brown shaly silt loam A horizons, brown shaly and very shaly silt loam B horizons and dark brown very shaly silt loam C horizons.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, active, frigid Typic Dystrudepts


TYPICAL PEDON:  Lagross channery silt loam - cultivated.  (Colors are for moist soil)

    Ap--0 to 8 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) channery silt loam; weak medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; 20 percent rock fragments; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (4 to 9 inches thick)

    Bwl--8 to 14 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) channery silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; 25 percent coarse fragments; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary. (5 to 11 inches thick)

    Bw2--14 to 36 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) very channery silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; common fine pores; 40 percent rock fragments; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (17 to 23 inches thick)

    C--36 to 60 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) very channery silt loam; massive; friable; strata of fine sand interspersed with small gravel; 50 percent rock fragments; moderately acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Jefferson County, New York; Town of Rodman, 100 feet northeast of N.Y. State Route 177 and 165 feet southeast of where this route intersects Williams Road.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The thickness of the solum ranges from 26 to 40 inches.  Rock fragments dominated by shale range from 15 to 60 percent in the A horizon and upper part of the B horizon, and from 35 to 70 percent in the lower part of the B and the C horizons.  Reaction ranges from very strongly acid through moderately acid in the A and B horizons and from strongly acid through slightly acid in the C horizon.

The Ap or A horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 through 4.  Texture is silt loam or loam in the fine-earth fraction.  Consistence is friable or very friable.

The B horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 or 4.  Texture is silt loam or loam in the fine-earth fraction.  Structure is weak or moderate, fine or medium subangular blocky.  Consistence is friable or firm.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Texture is silt loam or loam in the fine-earth fraction.  Consistence is friable or firm.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the tentative Moberg and Wausau series in the same family.  The lower part of the solum and substratum of Moberg soils is weathered granite with loamy sand or coarser fine earth textures.  Wausau soils are underlain by weathered granite at depths of 40 to 60 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Lagross soils are on nearly level to moderately steep areas of alluvial fans and outwash terraces.  Slopes range from 0 to 25 percent.  The soil formed in water-sorted material dominated by fragments from local shale bedrock.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from 35 to 55 inches, mean annual temperature ranges from 40 to 45 degrees F., and mean annual growing season from 90 to 130 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the well drained and moderately well drained Haights and poorly drained and very poorly drained Gulf soils in a drainage sequence.  Carbondale muck is in bogs.  Bice and Pinckney soils are on adjoining till uplands.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is slow to medium.  Permeability is moderately rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas have been cleared and are used for growing corn, oats, hay and pasture.  Common trees in forested areas are sugar maple, beech, oak, ash, cherry, white pine, red pine and red spruce.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Tug Hill Plateau and Black River Valley of New York.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Jefferson County, New York, 1983.

Remarks:  This series is the frigid analogue of the Blasdell series.


National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.


