LOCATION LAKIN                  WV+KY OH PA VA

Established Series
Rev. WFH-TAD-ART
05/2002

LAKIN SERIES

The Lakin series consists of very deep, excessively drained soils formed in coarse textured eolian or water-laid materials.  Lakin soils are located dominantly on the leeward side of major stream valleys. Permeability is rapid. Slope ranges from 0 to 40 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 38 to 44 inches and mean annual air temperature is about 50 degrees to 57 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Mixed, mesic Lamellic Udipsamments

TYPICAL PEDON: Lakin loamy fine sand, on a 10 percent slope in an abandoned area at the Mason County airport at an elevation of 640 feet. (Colors are for moist soil, unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 7 inches, brown (10YR 4/3) loamy fine sand; very weak fine granular structure; very friable; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary. (5 to 10 inches thick)

     E--7 to 11 inches, yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) loamy fine sand; very weak fine granular structure; very friable; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (0 to 10 inches thick)

     E and Bt1--11 to 17 inches, yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) loamy sand (E); single grain; loose;  brown (10YR 4/3) loamy sand discontinuous lamellae and lumps (Bt1);  very weak granular structure ; very friable; weak clay bridging of sand grains ; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. 

     E and Bt2--17 to 60 inches, yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) loamy sand (E);single grain loose;  brown (7.5YR 4/4) fine sand to fine sandy loam lamellae and lumps (Bt2);  very weak medium granular structure; very friable; clay bridging of sand grains; strongly acid; diffuse wavy boundary. (combined thickness of the E and Bt horizon is 20 to 70 inches)

     C--60 to 80 inches, brown (10YR 5/3) medium and fine sand; single grained; loose; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION: Mason County, West Virginia, about 3-1/2 miles north of Point Pleasant, about 1/2 mile east of junction of SR 62 and SR 62/4, approximately 100 feet north of SR 62/4; USGS Cheshire topographic quadrangle, Latitude 38 degrees, 54 minutes, 55 seconds N. Longitude 82 degrees 06 minutes 10 seconds W., NAD 1927. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness is 40 to 80 inches or more. Depth to the uppermost lamellae is 10 to 26 inches.  Volume of small pebbles ranges from 0 to 3 percent in the control section.  Unlimed soils are moderately acid to very strongly acid throughout.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR,value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 3 or 4.  Some A horizons are 2 to 5 inches thick, and have value and chroma of 2 or 3.

The E horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 5 or 6 and chroma of 4 to 8.  It is loamy fine sand, loamy sand, fine sand or sand.  

The E part of the E and Bt horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, and  value and chroma of 4 to 6.It is loamy fine sand, loamy sand, fine sand or sand.  The Bt part (lamellae or lumps) of the E and Bt horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 3 to 6.It is loamy fine sand, loamy sand, fine sand, and sand, with sandy loam or fine sandy loam in some lamellae. The lamellae in the E and Bt1 horizon are commonly discontinuous, 1/8 to 3/4 inch thick and usually have a combined total thickness of 1 inch or less.  Lamellae in the E and Bt2 horizon are 1/4 to 1-1/2 inches thick and have a combined total thickness of 5-1/2 inches or less.  The combined total thickness of the lamellae (Bt) in the particle-size controlsection is less than 6 inches.

The C horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR,value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 3 or 4.  It is commonly loamy sand or sand, and less commonly sand and gravel to light sandy loam.

COMPETING SERIES: The Chelsea, Coloma, and Colonie soil series are in the same family. All three competitors have contact with the uppermost lamellae at a depth greater than 26 inches, and are in areas that receive slightly lower annual precipitation. In addition, Coloma soils have reaction ranging from strongly acid to neutral in the lower E and Bt horizon and substratum, while Colonie soils are moderately acid to neutral below 40 inches and have a higher content of fine and very fine sand.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Lakin soils formed in coarse textured eolian or water-laid materials, and are located dominantly on the leeward side of main stream valleys. They are dominantly on risers and also on treads of terraces. Mean annual precipitation is about 38 to 44 inches, and the mean annual air temperature is about 50 degrees to 57 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are Chagrin, Chavies, Duncannon, Gallipolis,  Sciotoville and Wheeling soils.  Chagrin soils are fine-loamy and are located on floodplains. The Chavies, Duncannon, Gallipolis, Sciotoville, and Wheeling soils are on similar landscape positions. Chavies soils are coarse-loamy and have an argillic horizon. The Duncannon soils are coarse-silty and are on adjacent hillsides and dune-like slopes. The moderately well drained Gallipolis and Sciotoville soils are fine-silty and have an argillic horizon.  Wheeling soils are fine-loamy and have an argillic horizon.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Excessively drained. The potential for surface runoff potential is neglegible to low. Permeability is rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION: Most areas of Lakin soils are used for forages or are in pasture. A small acreage is used for specialty crops such as tomatoes,  melons, and other fruits and vegetables.  Wooded areas are hardwoods of mainly locust, sassafrass, paw-paw, oak, elm, maple and birch.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Valleys of the Ohio River, Susquehanna River and similar large streams in West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Kentucky, Ohio, and Virginia. The Lakin soils are of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Northumberland County, Pennsylvania, 1942.

REMARKS:This revision reflects a change in taxonomic classification to Lamellic Udipsamments due to updates contained in the 8th Edition of Keys to Soil Taxonomy.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in the pedon are:
ochric epipedon - zone from the surface to a depth of 7 inches (A horizon)
lamellic subgroup - lamella with total thickness of less than 6 inches in the series control section (E and Bt horizons)


National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
