LOCATION LANE                   SD

Established Series
Rev. DMH-TMS
02/97

LANE SERIES

The Lane series consists of very deep, well drained and moderately well drained soils formed in local clayey alluvium on foot slopes, fans, and stream terraces.  These soils have moderately slow or slow permeability.  Slopes range from 0 to 6 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 18 inches, and mean annual temperature about 49 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic, mesic Pachic Argiustolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Lane silt loam - on a plane slope of less than one percent in alfalfa.  When described the soil was dry throughout. (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

   Ap--0 to 8 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) silt loam, black (10YR 2/1) moist; moderate medium granular structure; slightly hard, friable; slightly sticky, and slightly plastic; neutral; abrupt smooth boundary.  (8 to 14 inches thick)

   Bt1--8 to 18 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) silty clay, very dark gray (10YR 3/1) moist; weak medium prismatic structure parting to moderate medium and fine subangular blocky; hard, firm, sticky, and plastic; shiny film on faces of peds; neutral; gradual wavy boundary.

   Bt2--18 to 24 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) silty clay, very dark grayish brown (2.5Y 3/2) moist; weak medium prismatic structure parting to moderate medium and fine subangular blocky; very hard, firm, sticky, and plastic; thin coats of dark gray (10YR 4/1) on faces of peds; shiny film on faces of peds; slight effervescence; slightly alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.  (Combined Bt horizons is 10 to 22 inches thick.)

   Btk--24 to 38 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) silty clay, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; weak medium prismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; very hard, firm, sticky, and plastic; patchy film on faces of peds; few fine accumulations of carbonate; strong effervescence; slightly alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.  (3 to 18 inches thick)

   Bk--38 to 44 inches; light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) silty clay, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, sticky, and plastic; common fine and medium accumulations of carbonate; strong effervescence; mildly to slightly alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.  (6 to 18 inches thick)

   C--44 to 60 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; massive; hard, friable, slightly sticky, and slightly plastic; strong effervescence; slightly alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Beadle County, South Dakota; about 5 miles east and 17 1/2 miles south of Wessington; 2,340 feet north and 175 feet east of the southwest corner of sec. 25, T. 109 N., R. 65 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the mollic epipedon ranges from 20 to 36 inches and includes all or part of the Bt horizon.  Depth to carbonate ranges from 8 to 25 inches.  Few or common tongues of A horizon material extend into the Btk horizon in some pedons.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 or 4 and 2 or 3 moist, and chroma of 1 or 2.  It is silt loam, loam, silty clay loam or is silty clay in some pedons.  It is slightly acid or neutral.

The Bt horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 3 to 5 and 2 or 3 moist, and chroma of 1 or 2.  It typically is silty clay, but is clay loam, clay, or silty clay loam in some pedons with an estimated 35 to 50 percent clay content.  It is slightly acid or neutral in the upper part and neutral or slightly alkaline in the lower part.

The Btk and Bk horizons have hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 to 7 and 3 to 5 moist, and chroma of 2 or 3.  They are silty clay, clay loam, or silty clay loam and are slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR, 2.5Y, or 5Y; value of 5 to 7 and 4 to 6 moist; and chroma of 2 to 4.  It is silty clay, silty clay loam, or clay loam.  Few or common nests or striations of salts and gypsum are in some pedons.  Thin strata of coarser or finer textures are between depths of 40 and 60 inches in some pedons.  Glacial till is between depths of 40 and 60 inches in some pedons.  The C horizon is slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Crete, Detroit, Ladysmith, Onita, Rago, and Smolan series.  Crete, Detroit, and Onita soils are leached of carbonate to greater depths.  Ladysmith soils have thicker sola, have free carbonate at greater depths and occur in areas of greater rainfall.   Rago soils have buried paleosols in the lower part of the series control section.  Smolan soils have redder hues in the lower part of the solum and are leached of carbonate to greater depths.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Lane soils are on foot slopes, fans, and stream terraces.  Slope gradients commonly are less than 3 percent but range from 0 to 6 percent.  Surfaces are plane or concave.  These soils formed in calcareous alluvial or colluvial-alluvial clayey sediments. The mean annual temperature ranges from 45 to 49 degrees F, and the mean annual precipitation ranges from 17 to 22 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Onita soils and the Beadle, Betts, Bon, Houdek, Jerauld, and Prosper soils.  Onita soils are in swales.  Beadle, Betts, and Houdek soils have a mollic epipedon less than 20 inches thick and are on higher nearby landscapes.  Bon soils are fine-loamy and on low stream terraces.  Jerauld soils have a natric horizon and are in the same landscape as Lane soils.  Prosper soils are in swales in higher nearby landscape and are fine-loamy.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained or moderately well drained.  Surface runoff is slow on nearby level areas and medium on the more sloping areas.  Permeability is moderately slow or slow. A perched water table may be within 4 feet of the surface for short periods in the spring in wet years.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of Lane soils are cultivated.  Corn, small grains, and alfalfa are the principal crops.   Native vegetation is mainly western wheatgrass, green needlegrass, blue grama, sedges, and forbs.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Central and south-central South Dakota, east of the Missouri River.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: St. Paul, Minnesota

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Jerauld County, South Dakota, 1951.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:  mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of about 24 inches (Ap, Bt1, and Bt2 horizons); argillic horizon - the zone from a depth of about 8 to 38 inches (Bt1, Bt2, and Btk horizons).



National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
