LOCATION LANEBURG               AR

Established Series
Rev. EPM-JH-AW-RKR-LW
09/2016

LANEBURG SERIES

The Laneburg series consists of very deep, somewhat poorly drained, clayey soils which formed in acid, clayey marine sediments overlying chalk and/or marl.  These soils are on level broad interfluves, with slopes of 0 to 2 percent slopes in MLRA 135B Cretaceous Western Coastal Plain. Mean annual tempertature is 60 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is 48 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic, thermic Typic Epiaquerts

TYPICAL PEDON: Laneburg silty clay loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

 A--0 to 5 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silty clay loam; moderate medium granular structure; firm; many fine and medium roots; few fine iron-manganese concretions; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.

 Btgss1--5 to 28 inches; gray (10YR 6/1) clay; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; very firm, sticky and plastic; common fine and medium roots; few fine pores; few distinct patchy clay films on faces of peds; few intersecting slickensides; common medium distinct brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) and few fine prominent yellowish red (5YR 5/6) iron accumulations; few fine iron-manganese concretions; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.

 Btgss2--28 to 51 inches; gray (5Y 6/1) clay; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; very firm, sticky and plastic; few fine roots; few fine pores; few distinct clay films on faces of peds; many intersecting slickensides; few mica flakes;  common medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) and yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) and few fine prominent yellowish red (5YR 5/6) iron accumulations; common fine iron-manganese concretions; few fine pores; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

 Bgss1--51 to 61 inches; light olive gray (5Y 6/2) clay; weak medium subangular blocky structure; very firm, sticky and plastic; few fine roots; few fine pores; many intersecting slickensides; few mica flakes; few fine prominent yellowish red (5YR 5/6) iron accumulations; common fine iron-manganese concretions; few fine pores; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

 Bgss2--61 to 80 inches; gray (5Y 5/1) clay; common medium distinct light olive brown (2.5Y 5/4) mottles; weak medium subangular blocky structure; very firm; sticky and plastic; many intersecting slickensides; few mica flakes; few fine roots; common Fe-Mn concretions; few fine pores; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Clark County, Arkansas; NE 1/4, SE 1/4, SE 1/4, sec. 16. T.9S., R.20W., 100 feet north of gravel road in a moist forest area; USGS Gurdon quadrangle, latitude 33 degrees 57 minutes 5 seconds N. and longitude 93 degrees 8 minutes 38 seconds W.  

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Solum thickness:  greater than 80 inches
Reaction:  slightly acid to strongly acid

A horizon
Hue:  10YR
Value:  4
Chroma:  2
Texture:  Silty clay loam, clay loam, silty clay or clay
Reaction:  slightly acid

Btgss horizon
Hue:  10YR or 5Y
Value: 6
Chroma:  1 or 2
Redoximorphic features:  shades of yellow and red
Texture:  clay
Reaction:  moderately acid

Bgss horizon
Hue:  5Y
Value:  6
Chroma:  1 or 2
Redoximorphic features:  shades of brown
Texture:  clay
Reaction:  strongly acid

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Carl, Judice, Osage and Terouge series. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Laneburg soils are on broad interfluves between small streams and drainageways.  The parent material consists of acid, clayey marine sediments overlying chalk and/or marl.  Slopes range from 0 to 2 percent. The mean annual tempertature is 60 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is 48 inches. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  This is the Deann series.  The Deann soils occur on more concave landscapes and are moderately well drained.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat poorly drained.  Runoff is high.  Permeability is is low.  The saturated hydraulic conductivity is low.  

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most ares are in commercial pine forest and pasture.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Western Cretaceous Coastal Plain (MLRA 135B) areas of Arkansas and possibly Oklahoma.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES PROPOSED:  Clark County, Arkansas, 2005

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 5 inches
Argillic horizon - the zone from 5 to a depth of 51 inches
Slicken sides - the zone from 5 to a depth of 80 inches
2016 Update was to change the series to Established

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
