LOCATION LEQUIRE                OK

Established Series
Rev. JEH-RB
09/2003

LEQUIRE SERIES

The Lequire series consists of shallow, well drained soils formed in reclaimed material from coal strip mines.  These nearly level to steep soils are on strip mines in the Arkansas Ridges and Valley land resource area.  Slopes range from 1 to 20 percent.  The mean annual soil temperature is about 56 degrees F. and mean annual precipitation is about 43 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, mixed, active, nonacid, thermic, shallow Alfic Udarents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Lequire loam, 5 percent slope, idleland.
    (Color are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

    Ad--0 to 7 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) loam; massive and platy structure; extremely hard, very firm; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (1 to 10 inches thick)

    Cd--7 to 14 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) and red (2.5YR 4/6) loam; massive structure; extremely hard, very firm; neutral; abrupt smooth boundary.  (4 to 19 inches thick)

    Cr--14 to 18 inches; dark gray (2.5Y 4/0) shale; churned and hard.

TYPE LOCATION:  Haskell County, Oklahoma; 2400 feet north and 1500 feet east of the southwest corner, Sec. 13, T.10N., R.21E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness and depth to unconsolidated bedrock is less than 20 inches.  Reaction of the solum ranges from medium acid to neutral.  Fragments of shale and sandstone range from 0 to 35 percent throughout the profile, but pedons with up to 80 percent shale fragments in the Cd horizon do occur.

The Ad horizon has hue of 7.5YR and 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 through 6.  Texture is a fine sandy loam, very fine sandy loam, loam, silt loam or silty clay loam.

The Cd horizon has hue of 2.5YR, 7.5YR, and 10YR, value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 1 through 6.  Texture is loam, clay loam and silty clay loam.  It is mottled in shades of red, brown and gray.

The Cr horizon has hue of 2.5Y, value of 4 and chroma of 0.  The upper part is slightly weathered and the lower part is hard.

COMPETING SERIES:  The Blocker series is in the same family.  Soils in similar families are the Kanima series and the tentative Cartersville, Emachaya, Whitefield and Ironbridge series.  Kanima soils have more coarse fragments throughout the profile.  Cartersville soils are less clayey and do not have Cd horizons.  Blocker soils have less than 10 inches of reclaim material over the shale.  Hoyt and Whitefield soils have depths of reclaim material over shale that are greater than 20 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Lequire soils are on nearly level to steep area of strip mines in the Arkansas Ridges and Valley land resource area.  These soils formed in materials from the premine soils of the Hector, Enders, Liberal, Linker and Stigler series.  The average annual temperature ranges from 54 to 57 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation ranges from 42 to 45 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the competing tentative series Blocker, Cartersville, Emachaya, Whitefield and the Kanima series.  Blocker soils occur with the Lequire soils on cutslope areas.  Cartersville soils are on similar areas and are less clayey than the Lequire soils.  Hoyt and Whitefield soils are on generally less sloping areas and have Cd horizons that are deeper over shale material.  Kanima soils are on adjacent non-reclaimed areas.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is rapid.  Permeability is very slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly for pasture or idleland.  Vegetation is bermuda grass, love grass, or native grasses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Oklahoma and Arkansas.  The series is not extensive with less that 2500 acres.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Haskell County, Oklahoma, 1989.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
