LOCATION LICKDALE               MD+PA VA WV

Established Series
Rev. WDC
12/2005

LICKDALE SERIES

The Lickdale series consists of deep, very poorly drained soils. Saturated hydraulic conductivity is low or very low. These soils are forming in residuum from acid sandstones and shales, with some local alluvium in places. Mean annual soil temperature is about 54 degrees F. and mean annual precipitation is about 42 inches 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy over sandy or sandy-skeletal, mixed, active, acid, mesic Humic Endoaquepts 

TYPICAL PEDON: Lickdale silt loam - cultivated (Colors are for moist soils.) 
 Ap--0-10--Black (10YR 2/1) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many roots; medium acid (limed); abrupt smooth boundary. (6 to 12 inches thick) 
 B21g--10-20 --Dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silty clay loam, with common fine distinct mottles of yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) and dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4); weak medium blocky and subangular blocky structure; firm, sticky and plastic; many roots in upper portion; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. (7 to 15 inches thick) 
 B22g--20-32 --Gray (10YR 5/1) sandy clay loam, with common medium distinct mottles of yellowish red (5YR 5/6); moderate coarse blocky and subangular blocky structure; firm, sticky and plastic; a few roots in upper portion; some irregular inclusions of loose sandy material; very strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary. (7 to 13 inches thick) 
 IICg--32-46 --Light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) loamy coarse sand; single grain; loose; no roots; very strongly acid; clear irregular boundary. (12 to 32 inches thick) 
 R-- 46 --Gray to pale brown weathered sandstone. 

TYPE LOCATION: Garrett County, Maryland; one and one-fourth miles east of McHenry on north side of Mosser Road. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Thickness of solum and depth to sandy layer ranges from 20 to 40 inches. Depth to bedrock is 3-1/2 to 6 feet. Fragments of sandstone, weathered but not waterworn, range from 0 to 20 percent in the solum and may be higher than 20 percent in the C horizon. Shale fragments may be present in some pedons. 
The A1 or Ap horizon is black, very dark gray or very dark grayish brown. The A1 horizon contains 10 percent or more organic matter. The B horizon matrix has hues of 10YR to 5Y or neutral, value of 4 through 6 and chroma of 0 through 2. Mottles have hues of 10YR to 5YR, values of 4 through 6 and chroma of 3 through 8. Textures are dominantly loam or silt loam, but silty clay loam, clay loam or sandy clay loam are included. The C horizon has about the same color range as the B horizon and is coarser in texture. 

COMPETING SERIES: The Vester series is the only known member of the same family. Other competing series include the Elkins and Sekiu soils. Insufficient information is available to differentiate the Vester soils. Elkins soils have textures with less than 15 percent coarser than very fine sand between depths of 10 to 40 inches. Sekiu soils have more than 60 percent clay and kaolintic mineralogy. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Lickdale soils occupy upland flats and slight depressions. Slopes range up to about 5 percent. The regolith is residuum from acid sandstones and shales, with some local alluvium in places. Mean annual soil temperature ranges from 47 degrees to 57 degrees F. and mean annual precipitation franges from 35 to 50 inches. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the well drained Clymer, Dekalb, Hazleton and Leetonia soils, the moderately well drained Cookport soils that have a pragipan and the poorly drained Nolo soils that have a fragipan. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Very poorly drained. Permeability and runoff are slow to very slow. 

USE AND VEGETATION: Artificially drained areas are used for corn and pasture. Native vegetation is wetland hardwoods, including willows and alders, with a ground cover chiefly of herbs and sedges. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Appalachian Ridges and Allegheny Plateau of Maryland and possibly similar areas of Virginia, West Virginia, Pennsylvania and Kentucky. The series is of small extent. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, 1901. 

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
1) Umbric epipedon-the zone from 0 to 10 inches (Ap horizon).
2) Cambic horizon-zone from 10 to 32 inches (B horizons)
3) Strongly contrasting particle-size classes at 32 inches.
4) Lithic contact at 46 inches. 

The 12/2005 revision updates this soil to the 9th Edition of the Keys to Soil Taxonomy (2003). The CEC activity class placement is based on similar soils and not on laboratory data. Class placement may be revised in the future when laboratory data are reviewed or become available.

Competing series, pedon description (including horizon nomenclature and/or descriptive terms), and other sections on the OSD were not revised.

Previous revision dates: 11/95

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
