LOCATION LUTTERLOH              FL

Established Series
Rev. GRB
10/2018

LUTTERLOH SERIES

The Lutterloh series consists of very deep, somewhat poorly drained, slowly to very slowly permeable soils that formed in thick beds of unconsolidated sandy and loamy marine sediments.  They are on broad, low uplands, karst uplands and on river flood plains in the Coastal Plain.  Near the type location, the mean annual temperature is about 68 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 55 inches.  Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, siliceous, subactive, thermic Grossarenic Paleudalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Lutterloh fine sand on a smooth 2 percent slope in forest.  (Colors are for moist conditions.)

   A--0 to 7 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) fine sand; weak fine granular structure; very friable; many fine and medium roots; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (5 to 9 inches thick)

   E1--7 to 24 inches; mixed light gray (10YR 7/2) and white (10YR 8/2) fine sand; single grained; loose; few fine medium and coarse roots; many uncoated sand grains; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

   E2--24 to 40 inches; mixed white (10YR 8/2) and light gray (5Y 7/2) fine sand; single grained; loose; few fine roots; sand grains mostly uncoated; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   E3--40 to 59 inches; white (5Y 8/1) fine sand with common coarse faint white (5Y 8/2) mottles; single grained; loose; sand grains mostly uncoated; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary. (Combined thickness of the E horizon is 35 to 65 inches.)

   Btg--59 to 71 inches; gray (5Y 6/1) very fine sandy loam; moderate fine and medium blocky structure; friable;  sand grains bridged and coated with clay; many medium prominent strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) masses of iron accumulation; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary.  (8 to 15 inches thick)

   2Btg--71 to 94 inches; light gray (5Y 7/1) sandy clay; weak medium platy structure, parting to weak medium subangular blocky; friable to firm; sand grains coated and bridged with clay; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Leon County, Florida.  Approximately 4 miles east of Woodville, about 50 feet south of Natural Bridge Road, and about 700 feet west of east section line. SE1/4, NE1/4, sec. 23, T. 2 S., R. 1 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The thickness of the solum and depth to limestone is more than 60 inches.  Some pedons have up to 3 percent gravel to boulder size limestone or chert fragments within the solum and on the surface.  The soil is very strongly acid to moderately acid in the A and E horizons, and from very strongly acid to neutral in the Btg horizon.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 1 or 2.

The E horizon has hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 5 to 8, and chroma of 4 or less.  Color is dominantly that of uncoated sand grains.  Texture is sand, fine sand, loamy sand, or loamy fine sand.

The Btg and 2Btg horizons have hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 2 or less with none to common mottles of brown, yellow, or red.  Texture of the Btg horizon is loamy fine sand, very fine sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or sandy loam, but ranges to sandy clay.  Texture of the 2Btg horizon is sandy clay loam or sandy clay.

Below a depth of 60 inches, some pedons are underlain with 2Cr or 2R horizons.

The Cr horizon, where present, has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 6 to 8, and chroma of 1 to 4.  It is composed of soft, weathered, fractured limestone that can be dug with difficulty with a spade, has very firm to extremely firm rupture resistance with low to high excavation difficulty.  It usually contains soft carbonate accumulations along with few to many hard limestone or chert fragments.  It is highly irregular and interspersed with solution holes that range from 4 to 12 inches in diameter and filled with sandy loam to sandy clay textured soil material.  Depth to limestone is variable within short distances.

The 2R horizon, where present, is composed of hard, unweathered limestone that has slightly rigid to very rigid rupture resistance with very high to extremely high excavation difficulty.  Some areas contain solution holes filled with with Btg and/or Cr material.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Kenney, Landman, Latch, Otela, Pickton, and Tonkavar series in the same family.  Kenney and Pickton soils are well drained and have high chroma in the argillic horizon.  Landman soils are moderately well drained and occur on stream terraces.  Otela soils are moderately well drained and have a water table at depths of 48 to 72 inches.  All of the other series in the same family are drier in the moisture control section for longer periods of time.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Lutterloh soils are on broad, low uplands, karst uplands and on river flood plains in the lower Coastal Plain.  Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent.  They formed in thick beds of unconsolidated sandy and loamy marine sediments influenced by underlying limestone. The average annual temperature ranges from 66 to 70 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation ranges from 50 to 60 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Chaires, Leon, and Talquin series.  All of these soils have spodic horizons and are on lower flatwoods landscapes.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat poorly drained; rapid permeability in the A horizon, moderate in the upper part of the argillic horizon, and slow to very slow in the lower part.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Lutterloh soils are used mainly for forestry.  Native vegetation consists of longleaf and slash pines, waxmyrtle, gallberry, sawpalmetto, greenbrier, pineland threeawn, blueberry, panicums, chalky bluestem, broomsedge bluestem, indiangrass, and ferns.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Gulf Coastal Plain.  The series is of small known extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Auburn, Alabama.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Leon County, Florida; 1979.

REMARKS:  This soil has color like that of Aqualfs.  However, low chroma in the A and E horizons is dominantly that of uncoated sand grains.  Based on field observation, the soil does not have an Aquic moisture regime in that the whole soil is not saturated.  Its behavior is like that of an Aquic subgroup and would be classified as Aquic Grossarenic Paleudalfs if such a subgroup was in Soil Taxonomy.

The water table is within depths of 20 to 30 inches for 2 to 4 months and within a depth of 40 inches for 6 months or more in most years.

Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon:

Ochric epipedon - 0 to 59 inches (A, E1, E2, E3).

Albic horizon - 7 to 59 inches (E1, E2, E3).

Argillic horizon - 59 to 94 inches (Btg, 2Btg).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
