LOCATION LYNNVILLE              TN+KY

Established Series
Rev. DEL
04/2001

LYNNVILLE SERIES

The Lynnville series consists of very deep, moderately well drained soils. They formed in alluvium on flood plains and in depressions.  Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, active, thermic Fluvaquentic Hapludolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Lynnville silt loam--cultivated.                 (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 8 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; very friable; many fine roots; few fine dark brown and black concretions; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

     A1--8 to 14 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) silt loam; common fine faint mottles of brown; weak fine granular structure; very friable; many fine roots; few fine dark brown and black concretions; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (combined thickness of A horizons is 10 to 24 inches)

     Bw1--14 to 34 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) silt loam; common fine and medium distinct grayish brown (10YR 5/2) mottles;  weak fine granular structure; very friable; common fine roots; few fine and medium dark brown and black concretions; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     Bw2--34 to 45 inches; mottled brown (10YR 5/3), grayish brown (10YR 5/2), dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4), and brown (10YR 4/3) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; few fine roots in upper part; few fine and medium dark brown and black concretions; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (combined thickness of Bw horizons is 0 to 36 inches)

     C--45 to 65 inches; mottled grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2), yellowish brown (10YR 5/4), and light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; many fine and medium weakly cemented dark brown and black concretions; slightly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Giles County, Tennessee; 5 miles west of Pulaski; 1/4 mile north of U.S. Highway 64; 500 yards west of Richland Creek.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Depth to bedrock is more than 60 inches.  Fragments of chert are less than 5 percent in most pedons, but ranges from 0 to 15 percent by volume.  Reaction is dominantly slightly acid to mildly alkaline throughout, but ranges to medium acid.  Some pedons have transitional horizons with color and texture similar to adjacent horizons.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 10YR, 7.5YR or 5YR, value of 3, and chroma of 2 or 3.  It is silt loam, loam, or fine sandy loam.

The Bw horizon, where present, has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 3 or 4 with mottles in shades of brown and gray.  In some pedons the Bw horizon has no matrix color but is mottled in shades of brown and gray.  Texture is silt loam, silty clay loam, or rarely loam.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 2 to 4 with mottles in shades of brown and gray or has no matrix color but is mottled in shades of yellow, brown and gray. Texture is silt loam, silty clay loam, or rarely loam.

COMPETING SERIES:  Lynnville is the only soil in this family. Soils in similar families are the Egam, Godwin, Lanton, Cannon, and Staser series.  All of these soils have mollic epipedons more than 24 inches thick.  In addition, Egam and Godwin soils are clayey, Lanton soils are poorly drained, Cannon soils are gravelly, and Staser soils are fine-loamy.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  These soils are on stream flood plains,  along upland drainageways and in depressions.  Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent.  Lynnville soils formed in alluvium transported mainly from soils developed in phosphatic limestone residuum.  In a few places there is some mixture of materials from loess and shale.  Near the type location the mean annual air temperature is 59 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the competing series and the Agee and Roellen series.  Agee and Roellen soils are poorly drained and have vertic properties.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained; medium runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used principally for growing corn, hay, and pasture.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Central Basin of Tennessee and the Bluegrass Region of Kentucky.  The series is of large extent with an area of about 150,000 acres.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Giles County, Tennessee; 1970.

REMARKS:  Lynnville soils were formerly classified as phosphatic phases of the Lindside series.  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are;

Mollic epipedon - from the surface of the soil to about 14 inches (Ap and A horizons).

Aquic conditions - colors of chroma 2 from about 14 inches to 65 inches (Bw1, Bw2 and C horizons).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
