LOCATION LYNX                   AZ+WY

Established Series
Rev. DRT-MSY-PDC
11/2006

LYNX SERIES

The Lynx series consists of deep, well drained soils that formed in mixed alluvium.  Lynx soils are on flood plains and alluvial fans and have slopes of 0 to 8 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 12 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 53 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Cumulic Haplustolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Lynx loam - rangeland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

       A1--0 to 2 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate medium platy structure parting to moderate fine granular; soft, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many fine roots; many fine vesicular pores; neutral (pH 7.0); clear wavy boundary. (1 to 6 inches thick)

       A2--2 to 14 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/2) clay loam, dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) moist; weak thick platy structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and plastic; many fine and medium roots; many fine and medium tubular pores; neutral (pH 7.0); clear wavy boundary.  (10 to 18 inches thick)

       C--14 to 60 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) clay loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; massive; slightly hard, friable, sticky and plastic; few fine and medium roots; many fine, medium and coarse tubular pores; 10 percent pebbles; common small stress surfaces; slightly alkaline (pH 7.5).

TYPE LOCATION:  Yavapai County, Arizona; 250 feet north of the southwest corner, sec. 9, T. 12 N., R. 1 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil Moisture:  Intermittently moist in some part of the soil moisture control section during July-September and December-February.  The soil is driest during May and June. Ustic aridic moisture regime.

Rock Fragments:  0 to 15 percent pebbles

Organic Matter:  Averages 1 percent or more in the surface; decreases irregularly with depth

Carbonates:  Noncalcareous to depths of 40 inches or more

Reaction:  Neutral to moderately alkaline

A horizon
Hue:  7.5YR, 10YR
Value:  2 to 5 dry, 3, 4 or 5 moist
Chroma:  2 or 3, dry or moist

C horizon
Hue:  7.5YR, 10YR
Value:  2 to 6 dry, 3, 4 or 5 moist
Chroma:  2, 3 or 4, dry or moist
Texture:  Loam, silt loam, clay loam, sandy clay loam
Clay content:  18 to 35 percent

A Bw horizon may be present in some pedons.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Bon (SD), Frazwell (), Manzano (NM), Maskell (NE), Mauricanyon (CO), Merrick (NE), Pack (UT), Shanta (NM), St. Onge (SD) and Umbarg (CO) series.  Bon, Draper, Humbarger, Shanta, St. Onge and Umbarg soils are calcareous throughout.  Draper and Pack soils have mottles at depths less than 40 inches. Frazwell soils have a stone line containing 40 to 55 percent rock fragments that overlies buried horizons.  Manzano soils have Bw horizons and segregated lime in the lower control section.  Maskell, Merrick and Mauricanyon soils are moist in the moisture control section during May and June.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Lynx soils are on flood plains and alluvial fans and have slopes of 0 to 8 percent.  These soils formed in alluvium from mixed sources.  Elevations range from 3,500 to 6,900 feet.  The mean annual precipitation ranges from 10 to 14 inches.  The mean annual air temperature is 47 to 59 degrees F.  The frost-free period is 120 to 180 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Abra, Arp, Balon, Deama, Dye, Gaddes, Lonti, Moano, Pastura, Showlow, and Wineg soils.  Abra soils have a calcic horizon.  Arp, Balon, Gaddes, Showlow, Lonti, and Wineg soils have an argillic horizon.  Deama, Dye, and Moano soils have bedrock at depths less than 20 inches.  Pastura soils have a petrocalcic horizon at depths less than 20 inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Slow runoff.  Moderately slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Lynx soils are used for grazing and irrigated cropland.  The present vegetation is blue grama, sideoats grama, alkali sacaton, spike muhly, vine mesquite, rabbitbrush, tobosa, big galleta, fourwing saltbush, snakeweed, western wheatgrass, and muttongrass.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  North-central Arizona.  This series is extensive. MLRA is 35, 39 & 61. Use in MLRA 61 should be discontinued.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Beaver Creek Area, Arizona, 1965.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon:  The zone from the surface to a depth of 60 inches (A and C horizons).
The fact that this soil is in a 10 to 14 inch precipitation zone (Ustic aridic) and irrigation is required for cropland, it is doubtful that soil is moist long enough to meet the requirement for a Mollisol. Classification of this soil should be re-evaluated when the area is updated.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
