LOCATION LYTLE                  LA

Established Series
Rev. DRM:JPE
02/2013

LYTLE SERIES

The Lytle series consists of very deep, well drained soils that formed in a mantle of loess about 2 to 3 feet thick and in underlying loamy and clayey Coastal Plain sediments.  These soils are on nearly level to moderately steep uplands.  Slopes range from 0 to 8 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, semiactive, thermic Typic Paleudults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Lytle silt loam--in a pine plantation. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 6 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; many fine and medium and few coarse roots; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 9 inches thick)

     E--6 to 11 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine and medium roots and few coarse roots; many fine pores; very strongly acid, abrupt smooth boundary. (0 to 9 inches thick)

     Bt1--11 to 19 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) silty clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few roots; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; many fine, medium and coarse pores; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

     Bt2--19 to 28 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) silty clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine, medium, and coarse roots; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; few fine pores; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

     Bt3--28 to 38 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) loam; moderate medium subangular structure; friable; few medium and coarse roots; common strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) uncoated sand grains; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; few fine pores; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bt horizons ranges from 20 to 40 inches.)

     2Bt/E--38 to 46 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) loam (2Bt); weak coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; firm; common fine, medium and coarse roots; 20 to 30 percent strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) uncoated sand grains (E); common distinct clay films on faces of peds; common fine pores; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary (0 to 10 inches thick).

     2B't1--46 to 56 inches; red (2.5YR 4/6) sandy clay loam; weak coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; firm; common strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) uncoated sand grains; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; common fine pores; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

     2B't2--56 to 67 inches; red (2.5YR 4/8) sandy clay loam; weak coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; firm; many pockets of strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) uncoated sand grains; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; few fine pores; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

     2B't3--67 to 81 inches; red (2.5YR 4/6) sandy clay; weak coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; firm; few fine roots; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; few fine pores; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  East Feliciana Parish, Louisiana; 1.9 miles southeast of Woodland, 1,800 feet south of Highway 432, 100 feet east of dirt road, sec. 39, T. 1 S., R. 3 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness exceeds 60 inches. Reaction ranges from very strongly acid to medium acid throughout the solum, except in areas that have been limed. In at least one subhorizon within 30 inches of the soil surface, the level of aluminum saturation is 20 percent or more. Brittle bodies near the contact of loess and Coastal Plain sediments ranges from 0 to 40 percent. Sand content ranges from 15 to 20 percent fine and coarse sand in the particle size control section.

The A or Ap horizon has value of 3 to 5 and chroma of 1 to 3. Where the color value is less than 3, the thickness is less than 6 inches. Texture is very fine sandy loam or silt loam.

The E horizon, where present, has value of 5 or 6 and chroma of 3 or 4.  Texture is very fine sandy loam or silt loam.

The Bt horizon has hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 8.  It is silt loam, silty clay loam, clay loam or loam.  Clay content commonly is 20 to 30 percent, but ranges from 18 to 34 percent.  The sand fraction is mainly very fine sand.

The 2Bt part of the 2Bt/E horizon, where present, has hue of 2.5YR or 5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 8. The E part has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 3 to 6. Texture of the 2Bt/E horizon is sandy loam, loam, silt loam, clay loam, or sandy clay loam.

The 2B't horizon has hue of 2.5YR or 5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 8. Texture is loam, sandy clay loam, clay loam, or sandy clay. Most pedons have few to many pockets of sand or loamy sand in shades of brown or yellow.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Addielou, Allen, Avilla, Bama, Dubach, Etowah, Holston, Ironcity (T), Leesburg, Minvale, Nella, Noboco, Octavia, Pikeville, Ruston, and Warnock series in the same family and the Lexington, Ora, Smithdale, and Tangi series in closely associated families. Addielou has a ochric epipedon more than 20 inches thick.  Allen soils have more than 20 percent fine and coarser sand in the particle size control section.  Avilla, Etowah, Ironcity, Minvale, Nella, and Octavia soils have fragments of sandstone or chert in the Bt horizon.  Bama and Pikeville soils do not have lithologic discontinuities within the solum.  In addition Pikeville soils have gravelly Bt horizons.  Dubach, Holston, Leesburg, Noboco, and Warnock soils have hue yellower than 5YR in the Bt horizons.  Ruston soils are bisequal.  Ora and Tangi soils have fragipans.  Lexington soils have mixed mineralogy and are Alfisols.  Smithdale soils are Hapludults.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Lytle soils are on nearly level to moderately steep uplands that have a mantle of loess about 2 to 3 feet thick underlain by loamy or clayey Coastal Plain sediments. Slopes range from 0 to 8 percent.  The average annual precipitation ranges from about 55 to 63 inches, and  average annual temperature ranges from about 64 to 68 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Ruston and Tangi soils and the Fluker, Guyton, Ouachita, Ochlockonee, and Smithdale soils. Fluker soils have a fragipan and are on local stream terraces adjacent to drainageways. Tangi soils have fragipans and are on less sloping parts of the landscape. Guyton, Ouachita, and Ochlockonee soils are on floodplains. Also, Guyton soils are poorly drained. Ruston soils are on similar positions as Lytle soils. Smithdale soils are on steeper side slopes.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Lytle soils are well drained. Runoff is medium and permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most of the Lytle soils are in pine woodland or pasture. A few areas are cultivated.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Louisiana, Mississippi, and west Tennessee.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: AUBURN, ALABAMA

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  St. Helena Parish, Louisiana; 1991.

REMARKS:  Family classification changed from fine-silty to fine-loamy with this revision of the series. These soils were formerly mapped as Lexington soils. Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

    Ochric epipedon...........0 to 11 inches (Ap and E).

    Argillic horizon..........11 to 81 inches (Bt1, Bt2,
                         Bt3, 2Bt/E, 2B't1, 2B't2, 2B't3).

    Lithologic discontinuity...the contact between the loess
      and Coastal Plain material at about 38 inches.  The
      sand fraction in the 28 to 38 inch zone is mainly very
      fine sand.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Laboratory data on the typifying pedon was obtained from the National Soil Survey Laboratory, NSSC, sample S90LA-003-002.  Additional data from NSSC, sample S89LA037-91.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
