LOCATION NANCY                  AK

Established Series
Rev. KMO-JPM
05/2022

NANCY SERIES

The Nancy series consists of very deep, well drained soils formed in a mantle of ash-influenced loess overlying sand or very gravelly sand.  Nancy soils are on alluvial terraces and moraines.  Slopes range from 0 to 60 percent.  The mean annual temperature is about 32 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation is about 26 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Medial over sandy or sandy-skeletal, mixed Andic Haplocryods

TYPICAL PEDON:  Nancy silt loam - on a 1 percent slope under forest vegetation.  (All colors are for moist soil)

    Oe--1 inch to 0; dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) mat of slightly decomposed forest litter; many fine and medium roots; abrupt smooth boundary. (1 to 5 inches thick)

    A--0 to 3 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; many fine roots; very strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (0 to 3 inches thick)

    E--3 to 4 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; many fine roots; very strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (1 to 4 inches thick)

    Bhs--4 to 7 inches; dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly smeary, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine roots; strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  1 to 3 inches thick)

    Bs--7 to 11 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly smeary, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine roots; strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (3 to 10 inches thick)

    Eb--11 to 13 inches; dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly smeary, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine roots; strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (0 to 3 inches thick)

    Bsb--13 to 20 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly smeary, nonsticky and nonplastic; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (0 to 8 inches thick)

    2C--20 to 60 inches; variegated very gravelly sand; single grain; loose; 25 percent gravel, 15 percent cobble.

TYPE LOCATION:  Yentna Area, Alaska; in the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of section 16, T.13N., R.11W., Seward Meridian.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The pedons have a bisequal sola.  The combined sola ranges from 15 to 25 inches in thickness.  The loess mantle ranges from 20 to 30 inches in thickness over sand or very gravelly sand.  The sola is usually formed entirely in the eolian mantle, but in some pedons extends into the underlying material.  The exchange complex of the sola is dominated by amorphous material.  The upper 4 inches of the spodic horizons has less than 6 percent organic carbon.  In many pedons, the upper horizons are churned and mixed due to treethrow and/or frost action.  Reaction in the solum is extremely acid to strongly acid and in the substratum is strongly acid to moderately acid.

The A horizon has hue from 5YR to 10YR; and value and chroma moist of 2 or 3.  Texture is silt loam, very fine sandy loam, or fine sandy loam.  This horizon is absent in some pedons.

The E horizon has hue from 5YR to 10YR; value moist from 4 to 6; and chroma moist of 1 or 2.

Texture of the Bhs and Bs horizons is silt loam, very fine sandy loam, or sandy loam.  The Bhs horizon has hue ranging from 2.5YR to 7.5YR; value moist from 3 to 5, and chroma moist from 2 to 4.  Weakly cemented fragments and concretions are often present.  The Bs horizon has hue ranging from 5YR to 10YR; value moist from 3 to 5; and chroma moist from 3 to 8.

The buried solum is usually similar to the surface solum in color and texture.  However, in pedons where the lower solum extends into the underlying material, the hue ranges to 2.5Y, and the texture ranges to sand or very gravelly sand.

The 2C horizon is variegated, but with a dominant hue from 10YR to 2.5Y.   Texture ranges from sand to very gravelly sand.  Some pedons contain a few brownish streaks from broken strata of weakly cemented fine sand.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Chulitna, Kashwitna, Shoestring and Soldotna series of the same family, and the Homestead and Lucile series.  Chulitna soils have a loess mantle thicker than 30 inches.  Homestead and Kashwitna soils have a loess mantle less than 20 inches thick.  Lucile soils are mottled and are poorly drained.  Shoestring soils contain coarse fragments of volcanic ash.  Soldotna soils are not bisequal.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Nancy soils are on alluvial terraces and moraines.  Slopes range from 0 to 60 percent.  The soils formed in ash-influenced loess overlying a friable, sandy or gravelly substratum.  The mean annual temperature ranges from 32 to 36 degrees F.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 20 to 32 inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Slow to rapid runoff.  Moderate permeability in the loess mantle and rapid in the underlying material.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mostly forested.  The dominant trees are paper birch, white spruce, and quaking aspen.  Small areas are cleared and used for grasses, oats, barley, potatoes, and hardy vegetables.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  South-central Alaska.  The series is extensive.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: WASILLA, ALASKA

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Matanuska Valley Area, Alaska, 1966.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon include:  spodic horizons from 4 to 20 inches; cryic temperature regime; an exchange complex dominated by amorphous material from 0 to 20 inches; sandy skeletal particle size from 20 to 60 inches.

The Nancy series includes the concepts of the former Rabideux(T) series as mapped in the Susitna Valley Area, Alaska.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Laboratory data is available for this soil - NSSL number 79P-2152-2160.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
