LOCATION NATHALIE               VA

Established Series
HLG-DHE-JCN/Rev. JAK
01/2019

NATHALIE SERIES

MLRA(s): 136 (mesic part)
Soil Survey Regional Office (SSRO) Responsible: Raleigh, North Carolina
Depth Class: Very deep
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Well drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Very deep
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Negligible to medium
Permeability: Moderate
Shrink-Swell Potential: Low
Landscape: Piedmont upland
Landform: Hill, ridge
Geomorphic Component: Interfluve, side slope
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, backslope
Parent Material: Residuum from felsic igneous and metamorphic rock
Slope: 0 to 15 percent
Elevation (type location): 535 feet
Frost Free Period (type location): 190 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature (type location): 57 degrees F.
Mean Annual Precipitation (type location): 42 inches 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, kaolinitic, mesic Typic Kanhapludults 

TYPICAL PEDON: Nathalie sandy loam (in an area of Nathalie sandy loam, 2 to 8 percent slopes), in a cultivated field. (Colors are for moist soil, unless otherwise indicated.) 

   Ap--0 to 9 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) sandy loam, brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) dry; weak fine granular structure; very friable; nonsticky; nonplastic; many fine and few medium roots; 12 percent by volume angular quartz gravel; slightly acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (1 to 12 inches thick) 

   BA--9 to 12 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) sandy clay loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; slightly sticky; slightly plastic; common fine and medium tubular pores; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary. (0 to 8 inches thick) 

   Bt1--12 to 27 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) clay; common medium distinct brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) and common medium prominent red (2.5YR 5/8) non-redoximorphic mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; moderately sticky; moderately plastic; few fine and medium roots; common fine and medium tubular pores; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary. 

   Bt2--27 to 42 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) clay; many coarse prominent red (2.5YR 4/8) non-redoximorphic mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; moderately sticky; moderately plastic; few fine and medium roots; common fine and medium tubular pores; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; few fine mica flakes; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary. (Combined thickness of the Bt horizon is 25 to 50 inches.) 

   BC--42 to 52 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) clay loam; common medium prominent yellow (10YR 7/8) non-redoximorphic mottles; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; firm; slightly sticky; slightly plastic; common fine mica flakes; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary. (0 to 15 inches thick) 

   C--52 to 65 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) and yellowish red (5YR 5/8) loam saprolite; massive; friable, slightly sticky, nonplastic; very strongly acid. 

TYPE LOCATION: Halifax County, Virginia; about 250 feet west of intersection of State Route 644 and 645, 50 feet west of Sate Route 644, about 0.26 mile north of Nathalie, in a cultivated field; USGS Nathalie, VA topographic quadrangle; lat. 36 degrees 56 minutes 14 seconds N. and long. 78 degrees 56 minutes 49 seconds W., NAD 27. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Depth to top of Argillic horizon: 4 to 14 inches
Depth to base of Argillic horizon: 35 inches or more
Depth to Bedrock: Greater than 60 inches
Depth to Seasonal High Water Table: Greater than 60 inches
Rock Fragment content: 0 to 25 percent, by volume in the A and E horizon; 0 to 15 percent in the B horizon; and 0 to 25 percent in the C horizon
Mica content: 0 to 20 percent, by volume in the B and C horizon
Soil Reaction: Very strongly acid or strongly acid throughout, unless limed
Other Features: Clayey part (greater than 35 percent clay) of the argillic horizon extends to a depth of 30 inches or more and is 25 to 60 inches thick.

RANGE OF INDIVIDUAL HORIZONS:

A or Ap horizon:
Color--hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 3 to 6, chroma of 2 to 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--coarse sandy loam, sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or loam 

E horizon (if it occurs):
Color--hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 4 to 6, chroma of 4 to 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--coarse sandy loam, sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or loam 

BA or BE horizon: 
Color--hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 to 6, chroma of 4 to 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--loam, sandy clay loam, or clay loam 

Bt horizon:
Color--hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 to 6, chroma of 4 to 8. Hue ranges to 5YR where there are few to many non-redoximorphic mottles.
Texture--clay loam or clay with 35 to 60 percent clay
Mottles (if they occur)--non-redoximorphic mottles in shades of red, brown, yellow, or white 

BC horizon or BCt horizon (if it occurs):
Color--hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 4 to 7, chroma of 4 to 8
Texture)--loam, sandy clay loam, or clay loam
Mottles (if they occur)--non-redoximorphic mottles in shades of red, brown, yellow, or white 

C horizon:
Color--hue of 2.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 4 to 8, chroma of 4 to 8, and commonly does not have a dominant color.
Texture (fine-earth fraction)--variable, commonly sandy loam, loam, sandy clay loam, or clay loam saprolite 

COMPETING SERIES:
Clifford soils--have redder subsoils
Fairview soils--have redder subsoils and have a clayey Bt horizon that is less than 25 inches thick
Hayesville soils--have redder subsoils at elevations above 2000 feet
Toast soils--have a clayey Bt horizon that is less than 25 inches thick
Westfield soils--have paralithic contact at 40 to 60 inches
Woolwine soils--have paralithic contact at 20 to 40 inches 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landscape: Piedmont upland
Landform: Hill, ridge
Geomorphic Component: Interfluve, side slope
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, backslope
Parent Material: Residuum from felsic igneous and metamorphic rocks
Slope: 0 to 15 percent
Elevation: 350 to 1400 feet
Mean Annual Air Temperature: 52 to 57 degrees
Mean Annual Precipitation: 40 to 55 inches
Frost Free Period: 160 to 205 days 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
Clifford soils--have a redder subsoil; on similar landforms
Halifax soils--have a perched seasonal high water table at a depth of 18 to 30 inches from the soil surface; on less convex segments of the same landforms
Bentley soils--have a perched seasonal high water table at a depth of 36 to 72 inches from the soil surface and are moderately slowly or slowly permeable; on summits with fluvial capping
Perrowville soils--have a coarse-loamy subsoil, more mica, and are moderately deep
Poplar Forest--have more mica and a redder subsoil
Huddleston--have a fine-loamy subsoil and more mica
Toast soils--have a clayey argillic horizon that is less than 25 inches thick; on similar landforms
Fairview soils--have a redder subsoil and have a clayey argillic horizon that is less than 25 inches thick; on similar landforms 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:
Depth Class: Very deep
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Well drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Very deep
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Negligible to medium
Permeability: Moderate
Shrink-Swell Potential: Low 

USE AND VEGETATION:
Major Uses: Cultivated crops, pasture
Dominant Vegetation: Where cultivated--tobacco, corn, soybeans, small grains, hay, and orchards. Where wooded--upland oak, post oak, hickory, black gum, red maple, yellow-poplar, dogwood, loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, and Eastern white pine. 

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Distribution: Virginia and North Carolina
Extent: Moderate

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Halifax County, Virginia, 2003. 

REMARKS: Nathalie soils were previously mapped as Appling soils. The creation of a mesic region within the southern Piedmont necessitated the establishment of a counterpart to the Appling series. Lab data supports the mineralogy classification of kaolinitic in this portion of MLRA 136, however identification of a kandic horizon is marginal and varied. Some of these soils have been mapped with the Buckhall series. Buckhall soils are not kandic and have mixed mineralogy with moderate shrink-swell potential. 
Diagnostic horizons and soil characteristics recognized in this pedon:
Ochric epipedon--the zone from 0 to 9 inches (Ap horizon)
Argillic horizon--the zone from 9 to 52 inches (BA, Bt, and BC horizons)
Kandic horizon--the zone from 9 to 52 inches (BA, Bt, and BC horizons) 
Other soil features identified with this pedon:
Series control section--the zone from 0 to 60 inches 

ADDITIONAL DATA:
Laboratory Data: Reference data for particle-size and chemistry of the Bt horizon is available from Virginia Tech., Blacksburg, VA. 
Database Information:
Typical Pedon Data Mapunit ID--103287 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
