LOCATION NEHASNE                NY

Established Series
Rev. SCC-FLG-GWS
04/2013

NEHASNE SERIES

The Nehasne series consists of moderately deep, well drained soils that formed in till on uplands. Slopes are commonly 0 to 15 percent, but range to 35 percent. The mean annual temperature is about 6 degrees C, and mean annual precipitation is about 965 mm. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, active, frigid Dystric Eutrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON: Nehasne sandy loam, on a 4 percent, convex bedrock controlled landscape in a hayfield. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.) 

   Ap -- 0 to 18 cm; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) sandy loam; pale brown (10YR 6/3) dry; weak fine granular structure; very friable; many very fine and fine, and common medium roots; 8 percent gravel, 2 percent channers; slightly acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (13 to 25 cm thick.) 

   Bw1 -- 18 to 46 cm; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) gravelly fine sandy loam; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure parting to weak medium granular; friable; many very fine and fine, and common medium roots; many fine, common medium and coarse vesicular and tubular pores; common worm and old root channels filled with Ap material; 15 percent gravel, 5 percent cobbles; neutral; clear wavy boundary. 

   Bw2 -- 46 to 58 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) gravelly fine sandy loam; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; very friable; few very fine, fine, and medium roots; many fine medium and coarse vesicular and tubular pores; common pockets of reddish brown (5YR 4/4) fine sandy loam 1 to 3 inches in diameter; 20 percent gravel, 10 percent cobbles; neutral; clear wavy boundary. (Combined thickness of the Bw horizon is 25 to 64 cm.) 

   BC -- 58 to 64 cm; dark brown (10YR 3/3) gravelly fine sandy loam; massive; very friable; few very fine and fine roots; few fine, medium, and coarse vesicular and tubular pores; 20 percent gravel, 10 percent cobbles; neutral; abrupt irregular boundary. (0 to 33 cm thick.) 

   R -- 64 cm; marble bedrock, tilted and folded. 

TYPE LOCATION: St. Lawrence County, New York; town of Canton, 1500 feet due north of a point on New York Rt. 68 that is 6000 feet WNW of Langdon Corners. USGS Pierrepont, NY topographic quadrangle: Latitude 44 degrees, 34 minutes, 54 seconds N. and Longitude 75 degrees, 05 minutes, 58 seconds W., NAD 1927. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: The thickness of the solum and depth to bedrock range from 50 to 100 cm. Rock fragments, mostly gravel and cobbles, range from 5 to 25 percent in the upper part of the mineral solum and from 20 to 45 percent in the BC horizon and in the C horizon, where present. 

The A horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 2 to 3, and chroma of 1 or 2. It is fine sandy loam, sandy loam, or loam in the fine-earth fraction. Structure is weak or moderate granular. Consistence is friable or very friable. Reaction is moderately acid or slightly acid. 

The Bw horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 through 6. It is commonly fine sandy loam and less commonly loam in the fine-earth fraction. Structure is weak or moderate subangular blocky. Consistence is friable or very friable. Reaction is slightly acid or neutral. 

The BC horizon has commonly has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 3 or 4. It is loam, fine sandy loam, or sandy loam in the fine-earth fraction. Structure is weak or moderate subangular blocky, or it is massive. Consistence is friable or very friable. Reaction is neutral or slightly alkaline. 

Some pedons have a C horizon with hue of 10YR, value of 3 through 5, chroma of 3. It is loam, fine sandy loam, or sandy loam in the fine-earth fraction. It is massive. Consistence is friable or firm. Reaction is neutral or slightly alkaline. 

COMPETING SERIES: Pyrities is the only series in the same family. Pyrities soils are more than 60 inches deep to bedrock.

Conic and Linneus soils are in related families. Conic soils have lower base status and formed in dense till from igneous rocks. The Conic soils are also in areas with lower precipitation. Linneus soils are restricted to silt loam texture. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Nehasne soils are nearly level to moderately steep soils over sandstone, dolomite, limestone or marble bedrock. They formed in till. Slopes are commonly 0 to 15 percent, but range to 35 percent. The mean annual air temperature ranges from 3 to 7 degrees C, and the mean annual precipitation ranges from 863 to 1270 mm. The growing season (frost-free) ranges from 90 to 150 days. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Kalurah, Insula, Malone, Matoon, Ogdensburg, Summerville, Pyrities, and Ruse soils. The Kalurah, Pyrities, and Malone soils are deep soils on nearby landscapes where the topography is not influenced as much by closely underlying bedrock. In addition, Malone soils have an aquic moisture regime. Matoon soils are fine-textured and are on nearby landscapes of lacustrine or marine derivation. Insula soils are 25 to 50 cm deep to bedrock. Ogdensburg and Ruse soils have aquic moisture regimes. In addition, Ruse soils are 25 to 50 cm deep to bedrock. 

DRAINAGE AND SATURATED HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY: Well drained. The potential for surface runoff is low to high. Saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderately high or high throughout the mineral soil. 

USE AND VEGETATION: In areas that have flat bedded sedimentary rock, Nehasne soils are generally used for row crops or hayland. In areas that have folded metamorphic rock, these soils are either in hayland, pasture, or are forested. Tree species include sugar maple, basswood, white ash northern red oak and hemlock. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Northern New York. MLRAs 142 and 143. The soils are of moderate extent. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: St. Lawrence County, New York, 1990. 

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
1. Ochric epipedon - the zone from 0 to 18 cm (Ap horizon).
2. Cambic horizon - the zone from 18 to 58 cm (Bw horizons).
3. Dystric Eutrochrept feature - data have been collected on similar soils that indicate that neutral reactions are indicative of base saturations in excess of 60 percent saturation. There are no free carbonates within one meter, however (Dystric feature). 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
