LOCATION NESHOBA                MS

Established Series
Rev. WMK:WIS:RBH
09/2003

NESHOBA SERIES

The Neshoba series consists of deep, well drained, gently sloping to sloping soils on uplands of the Southern Coastal Plain Major Land Resource Area.  Permeability is moderately slow.  These soils formed in glauconitic marine sediments of Eocene Age.  Slopes range from 2 to 8 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, semiactive, thermic Rhodic Paleudults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Neshoba silt loam - cultivated.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 5 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) silt loam; few fine distinct dark red (2.5YR 3/6) mottles; weak fine granular structure; friable; many fine roots; slightly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (A horizon is 2 to 6 inches thick; Ap horizon is 3 to 10 inches thick)

     Bt1--5 to 16 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) silty clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm, slightly sticky and plastic; common fine roots; nearly continuous clay films on faces of peds; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

     Bt2--16 to 36 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) clay loam; moderate fine and medium angular blocky structure; firm; sticky and plastic; few fine roots; continuous clay films on faces of peds; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

     Bt3--36 to 56 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) clay; moderate fine and medium angular blocky structure; firm, sticky and plastic; clay films or pressure faces on surfaces of peds; common medium to coarse ironstone cobbles and stones; common pockets of greensand; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

     Bt4--56 to 70 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) clay; moderate fine and medium angular blocky structure; firm, sticky and plastic; continuous clay films or pressure faces on surfaces of peds; many medium to coarse ironstone cobbles and stones; many pockets of greensand; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bt horizon is 48 to 60 inches or more)

     BC--70 to 80 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) clay; many fine to coarse distinct strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm, sticky and plastic; patchy clay films or pressure faces on surfaces of peds; many medium to coarse ironstone cobbles and stones make up about 25 percent of the volume; many pockets of greensand; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Neshoba County, Mississippi; 1 1/4 miles east of Neshoba County Fairgrounds; 3/4 mile north and 60 feet west into field; SW1/4NW1/4 sec. 17, T. 10 N., R. 11 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness exceeds 60 inches.  Reaction of the soil is very strongly acid or strongly acid, except the surface layer in areas that have been limed.  The A horizon has hue of 5YR, 7.5YR, or 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 to 6.  It is silt loam, sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or loam.  Some pedons have an E horizon or an EB horizon.

The Bt horizon has hue of 10R, 2.5YR, or 5YR value of 3, and chroma of 4 to 6.  Texture is silty clay loam, clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.  The upper 20 inches of the Bt horizon has 35 to 55 percent clay.  Ferruginous concretions or ironstone fragments, if present, are few to as much as 15 percent in the upper part of the Bt horizon and as much as 25 percent in the lower part.  Partially weathered, soft to hard greensand and glauconitic materials are at a depth of 5 to 7 feet in some pedons.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no series in the same family.  Series in closely related families include the Anniston, Decatur, Greenville, Lucedale, Nacogdoches, Red Bay, Shubuta, and Williamsville soils.  Anniston, Decatur, Greenville, and Nacogdoches soils have kaolinitic mineralogy.  Lucedale and Red Bay soils have a fine-loamy particle size class.  Shubuta soils have a Bt horizon with a matrix that has color value of more than 3.  Williamsville soils have more than 20 percent decrease in clay from the maximum within 60 inches of the surface.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Neshoba soils are on uplands of the Southern Coastal Plain Major Land Resource Area.  These soils formed in beds of glauconitic marine sediments of Eocene Age.  These are gently sloping to sloping soils with slopes that range from 2 to 8 percent.  The climate is warm and humid.  Near the type location, mean annual temperature is 64 degrees Fahrenheit, and mean annual precipitation is 54 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Lucedale and Williamsville soils of the competing series and the Ruston and Smithdale soils.  Ruston and Smithdale soils are fine-loamy in the particle size control section, Lucedale soils mainly are on broader, nearly level parts of the landscape.  Williamsville and Ruston soils are in similar landscape positions as the Neshoba soils.  Smithdale soils mainly are on hillsides in steeper, more dissected terrain.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium to rapid runoff; moderately slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of these soils are used for growing cotton, corn, soybeans, and pasture grasses.  Smaller acreages are in pine trees and low grade hardwoods.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Mississippi.  The series is of modern extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Auburn, Alabama

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Neshoba County, Mississippi; 1972.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to a depth of approximately 5 inches (Ap horizon).

Argillic horizon - the zone from approximately 5 to 70 inches (Bt1, Bt2, Bt3, Bt4 horizons).

Rhodic Paleudults feature - Upper 40 inches of argillic horizon has color value of less than 4 (Bt1, Bt2, Bt3 horizons).

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Laboratory data for one pedon by Soil Genesis and Morphology Laboratory of the Mississippi Agricultural and Forestry Experiment Station, Mississippi State, Mississippi.  Engineering test data for one pedon by Mississippi State Highway Department.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U. S. A.


