LOCATION VASHTI                 TX

Established Series
Rev. JDM:GLL
04/2003

VASHTI SERIES

 The Vashti series consists of moderately well drained, moderately
 permeable soils formed in residuum of sandstone.  These gently
 sloping upland soils have slopes ranging from 1 to 5 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, superactive, thermic Aquic Haplustalfs

 TYPICAL PEDON:  Vashti loamy fine sand--wooded pasture.
                 (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

      A1--0 to 3 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) loamy fine sand,
 very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak fine granular
 structure; soft, very friable; many fine roots; slightly acid;
 clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 6 inches thick)

      A2--3 to 14 inches; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) loamy fine sand,
 brown (7.5YR 5/4) moist; single grained; soft, very friable; few
 fine roots; slightly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (6 to 16
 inches thick)

      B21t--14 to 26 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) sandy clay
 loam, dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/6) moist, with many medium
 distinct red (2.5YR 4/8) mottles and a few fine distinct gray
 mottles; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; very hard,
 firm; few fine roots; many fine pores; continuous clay films on
 faces of peds; medium acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (4 to 16
 inches thick)

      B22t--26 to 36 inches; yellow (10YR 7/6) sandy clay loam,
 yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) moist, with few faint reddish yellow
 mottles and common medium prominent light gray (10YR 7/1) mottles;
 weak fine subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; patchy clay
 films on faces of peds; medium acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (8
 to 18 inches thick)

      R--36 to 42 inches; strongly cemented brownish sandstone
 bedrock.

 TYPE LOCATION:  Erath County, Texas; approximately 18 miles
 northwest of Stephenville, Texas; from the county road
 intersection at the Russell Chapel Cemetery, 0.55 mile south on
 county road and 120 feet west of road in wooded pasture.

 RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness and depth to strongly
 cemented or indurated sandstone bedrock ranges from 20 to 40
 inches.  Coarse fragments of sandstone and chert mainly less than
 10 inches across ranges from 0 to 15 percent by volume in the
 solum.   Sandstone and ironstone fragments about 10 to 24 inches
 across cover 0 to 15 percent of the soil surface.  The fragments
 are usually partially imbedded in the surface layer.

 The A horizon has hue of 7.5YR and 10YR, value of 3 through 6, and
 chroma of 2 through 4.  The A2 horizon is typically 1 or 2 units
 of value greater than the A1 horizon.  Texture is loamy fine sand,
 fine sandy loam, or stony loamy fine sand.  Reaction is slightly
 acid or neutral.

 The Bt horizon has hue of 7.5YR, 10YR, and 2.5Y, value of 5
 through 7, and chroma of 2 through 8.  Mottles in shades of red,
 brown, or yellow and mottles with chroma of 2 or less range from
 few to many.  Some pedons have a mottled matrix.  Texture is sandy
 clay loam or clay loam with clay content of 20 to 35 percent.  The
 reaction ranges from medium acid through neutral.

 Competing Series:  There are no competing series in the same
 family.  Other competing soils in similar families are the Cobb,
 Hye, Shavash, and Stephenville series.  Cobb, Hye, and
 Stephenville soils have argillic horizons with hues redder than
 7.5YR.  Shavash soils have sola less than 20 inches thick and lack
 mottles with chroma of 2 or less.

 GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Vashti soils are gently sloping with plane or
 slightly concave surfaces.  They are mainly on stream divides with
 slopes of 1 to 5 percent.  The soils formed in residuum from
 sandstone of Pennsylvanian age.  The climate is dry subhumid.  The
 mean annual temperature ranges from 64 degrees to 67 degrees F.;
 annual precipitation is 26 to 32 inches; and Thornthwaite P-E
 indices are 38 to 50.

 GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the competing
 Shavash series and the Bonti, Chaney, Exray, Shatruce, and Truce
 series.  Shavash soils are also on stream divides.  Bonti and
 Chaney soils have fine textured argillic horizons.  Bonti soils
 are below along hillsides.  Chaney soils are below on stream
 divides.  Exray soils have sola less than 20 inches thick and are
 below along hillsides.  Shatruce ad Truce soils are formed in
 shaly materials and have fine textured argillic horizons.
 Shatruce soils are on bouldery escarpments.  Truce soils are below
 along hillsides or on lower stream divides.

 Drainage and Permeability:  Moderately well drained; slow to
 medium runoff; moderate permeability.  Water is perched above the
 bedrock for short periods following heavy rainfall.  The periods
 are less than a month in duration.

 USE AND VEGETATION:  Vashti soils are used mainly for rangeland
 but significant areas are in lovegrass and bermudagrass pastures.
 A few areas are cultivated to peanuts or sorghums.  The climax
 plant community is mid and tall grasses in an open savannah of
 postoak and blackjack oak.  Primary grasses and forbs include
 bluestems, indiangrass, sand lovegrass, sand dropseed, tall
 dropseed, western ragweed, dalea species and trailing wildbean
 with greenbrier and bumelia.  Low producing grasses and forbs as
 well as mesquite, cedar, and elm trees have invaded.

 DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Mainly in the Texas North Central
 Prairie Land Resource Area; the series is of moderate extent.

 SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Gillespie County, Texas; 1970.

           National Cooperative Soil Survey
           U. S. A.


