LOCATION VENTRIS                AR

Established Series
Rev. LAQ
10/2003

VENTRIS SERIES

The Ventris series consists of moderately deep, moderately well drained soils with very slow permeability.  They formed in
residual material weathered from dolomite, limestone, or
calcareous shales.  These soils are on uplands in the Ozark
Highland.  Slopes range from 3 to 40 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Very-fine, mixed, active, mesic Albaquic Hapludalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Ventris very cherty silt loam, 1 to 3 percent
slopes in woodland.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
stated.)

     A1--0 to 2 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) cherty silt loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; 15 percent fragments of chert; neutral; abrupt smooth boundary.  (1 to 6 inches thick)

     A2--2 to 5 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) cherty silt loam; weak
fine subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine roots; approximately 15 percent fragments of chert; slightly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (0 to 5 inches thick)

     B21t--5 to 16 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) clay; common medium distinct light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) and reddish brown
(5YR 4/4) mottles; moderate medium angular blocky structure; very firm; few fine roots; common fine pores; thin continuous clay
films on faces of peds and in pores; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to 15 inches thick)

     B22t--16 to 32 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) clay;
common medium distinct gray (10YR 6/1) mottles; moderate fine
angular blocky structure; very firm; few fine roots; few fine
tubular pores; thin continuous clay films on faces of peds and in pores; 15 percent fragments of limestone; common slickensides; neutral; abrupt wavy boundary.  (12 to 18 inches thick)

     Cr--32 to 34 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) highly
fractured weathered dolomite.

     R--34+ inches; hard level bedded dolomite bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Baxter County, Arkansas; about 1 mile east of Mountain Home on Buzzard Roost Road and 1400 feet south.  SE1/4SW1/4NW1/4 sec. 2, T. 19 N., R. 13 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The solum thickness and depth to
bedrock ranges from 24 to 40 inches.

The A1 horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 2,
or value of 3, and chroma of 3.  The A2 horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2, 3, or 4.  The A horizon is silt loam, silty clay loam or with cherty, very cherty or stony
textural modifiers.  The reaction ranges from medium acid to
neutral.

The B21t horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 5, and chroma
of 4 or 6, or value of 4, and chroma of 4.  The reaction ranges
from medium acid to neutral.  Mottles are in shades of gray,
brown, or red.  The B22t horizon has hue of 7.5YR, 10YR, or 2.5Y, value of 5, and chroma of 4 or 6 and mottled with hue of 10YR,
value of 4, 6, or 7, and chroma of 1 or 2, or is mottled in shades
of gray, brown, and red with no dominant color.  The reaction
ranges from slightly acid to mildly alkaline.  The B3 horizon,
where present, has similar color and texture as the B22t horizon.  The B horizon is clay or cherty clay with 0 to 20 percent
fragments of chert, limestone, or shale.

The Cr horizon is highly fractured weathered dolomite, limestone,
or shale of light gray to yellowish brown colors.

The underlying bedrock (R) is hard level bedded dolomite limetone
or shale.

COMPETING SERIES:  Ventris is the only series in this family.
Series with common limits in definition are Cadeville, Homa, Invershiel, Marion, Orange, and Wister series.  Cadeville, Invershiel, Orange, and Wister soils have less than 60 percent
clay in the control section and are thermic.  Homa soils are
similar in texture but are thermic.  Marion soils have less than
60 percent clay in the control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Ventris soils are on broad gently sloping uplands, side slopes, and on foot slopes of hills and mountains.  Slopes range from 3 to 40 percent.  They formed in residual
material weathered from dolomite, limestones, and calcareous
shales of the Ozarks Highlands.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are Arkana, Captina, Clarksville, Doniphan, Gassville, and Moko series.  Arkana soils
have thicker mollic surface layers, dominant B horizon colors of
5YR and on similar landscapes and steeper side slopes.  Captina
soils have a fine-silty control section, a fragipan, and are
adjacent similar landscapes.  Doniphan soils are deeper than 40 inches to bedrock, have redder B horizons, low base saturation in
the lower solum and on similar landscapes.  Gassville soils have redder B horizons, low base saturation in the lower solum and
mostly on steeper side slopes.  Moko soils are shallow to bedrock, have a loamy-skeletal control section, and on similar landscapes.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained; medium to
rapid runoff; very slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Some areas are used for pasture and hay.
Most areas are in forests of redcedar, blackjack oak, post oak,
and elm the native vegetation.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Arkansas, Missouri, and possibly
Tennessee.  The series is moderately extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Benton County, Arkansas; 1973.

REMARKS:  The Ventris series would have been classified in the Red-Yellow Podzolic great soil group.  These soils were mapped
under the field name of Colbert.  Change in classification based
on University of Arkansas Soils Laboratory Data from Baxter
County, Benton County, and Lawrence County, Arkansas.

                 National Cooperative Soil Survey
                             U. S. A.


