LOCATION VERITE                 AZ+NM

Established Series
Rev. JWH/SAZ
08/2008

VERITE SERIES

The Verite series consists of shallow or very shallow, well drained soils that formed in eolian material and residuum derived from sandstone and shale.  Verite soils are on summits and shouldsrs of  mesas and plateaus.  Slopes are 2 to 45 percent. Mean annual precipitation is about 20 inches. Mean annual air temperature is about 47 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Lithic Haplustalfs

TYPICAL PEDON: Verite fine sandy loam - mixed ponderosa pine, pinyon pine, and Rocky Mountain Juniper woodland. (Colors are for dry soils unless otherwise noted.)

	A--0 to 2 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) fine sandy loam, dark brown (7.5YR 3/3) moist; weak fine granular structure; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine roots throughout; neutral (pH 6.6); abrupt smooth boundary. (1 to 4 inches thick)

	Bt1--2 to 6 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) clay loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/3) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; moderately hard, friable, slightly sticky and moderately plastic; common very fine, fine, and medium roots throughout; common very fine pores; common continuous distinct clay films on faces of peds and lining pores; neutral (pH 6.6); clear smooth boundary. (3 to 10 inches thick)

	Bt2--6 to 11 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) clay loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/3) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; moderately hard, friable, moderately sticky and moderately plastic; common very fine, fine, and medium roots throughout; common very fine discontinuous tubular pores; common continuous distinct clay films on faces of peds and lining pores; neutral (pH 6.8); abrupt smooth boundary. (0 to 12 inches thick)

	R--11 inches; fractured sandstone bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION: Apache County, Arizona; West of Window Rock Quadrangle; about 2 miles west of St. Michaels; Latitude 35 degrees 45 minutes 45 seconds and Longitude 109 degrees 11 minutes 12 seconds west.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture - Typically, the soil moisture control section (SMCS) is moist in all parts from January to April and intermittently moist in some part from July to December. Driest during May and June.  Typic ustic moisture regime. 

Soil temperature:   45 to 49 degrees F.

Depth to bedrock: 6 to 20 inches

Particle-size control section
	Clay:  18 to 35 percent 
	Rock fragments:  0 to 10 percent

A horizon 
Hue: 5YR, 7.5YR
Value: 4 through 7 dry, 3 through 5 moist
Chroma: 2 through 4, dry or moist

Bt horizon 
Hue: 5YR or 7.5YR
Value: 4 through 6 dry, 3 through 5 moist
Chroma: 3 through 6, dry or moist
Texture: loam, sandy clay loam, clay loam

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Arabrab (NM), Pescado (NM), Atarque (NM), Valena (AZ), Uva (NM) and Simitarq (NM) series. The Arabrab, Pescado, Atarque, Valena, and Simitarq soils all have an aridic ustic soil moisture regime.  Uva soils  have 8 to 18 percent clay in the particle size control section.  Pescado soils are inactive.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The Verite soils occur on summits and shoulders of plateaus on Sandstone bedrock controlled landscapes. Slopes are 1 to 6 percent. Average annual precipitation ranges from 18 to 22 inches. Average annual temperature is about 46 to 48 degrees F. and the average frost-free period is about 110 to 130 days. Elevation ranges from 7,500 to 8,000 feet.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Manuelito and Flutedrock soils.  Manuelito soils are moderately deep and Flutedrock soils lack an argillic horizon.   

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained; low runoff; moderate or moderately slow permeability

USE AND VEGETATION:  These soils are used for wood products, livestock grazing, recreation, and wildlife habitat. Present vegetation is ponderosa pine, pinyon pine, Rocky Mountain juniper, Gambels oak, and Indian ricegrass.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Northeastern Arizona and northwest New Mexico.  MLRA 35, LRR-D. The Verite series is extensive. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Fort Defiance Area, Parts of Apache and Navajo Counties Arizona, and McKinley and San Juan Counties, New Mexico; 2008.  The name Verite is coined.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - the zone from 0 to 2 inches (A horizon) When colors meet the requirements of a mollic epipedon, the horizon is less than 4 inches thick

Argillic horizon - the zone from 2 to 11 inches (Bt1 and Bt2 horizons) 

Lithic contact - the boundary at 11 inches (R horizon)

Classified according to Soil Taxonomy Second Edition, 1999; Keys to Soil Taxonomy, Tenth Edition, 2006

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
