LOCATION VINT                   AZ

Established Series
Rev. HCD/EDA/PDC
04/2009

VINT SERIES 

The Vint series consists of very deep, somewhat excessively drained soils formed in stratified stream alluvium.  Vint soils are on flood plains and have slopes of 0 to 3 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 7 inches and the mean annual air temperature is about 71 degrees F. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy, mixed, hyperthermic Typic Torrifluvents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Vint loamy fine sand - cultivated. (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

    Ap--0 to 12 inches; pale brown (10YR 6/3) loamy fine sand, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable; few fine and medium roots; few fine irregular pores; slightly effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 16 inches thick) 

    C1--12 to 33 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) stratified loamy fine sand with some thin strata of silt loam, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; single grain; loose; few fine roots; common fine irregular pores; slightly effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); abrupt wavy boundary.  (15 to 33 inches thick) 

    C2--33 to 45 inches; pale brown (10YR 6/3) stratified loamy fine sand with some thin strata of very fine sandy loam, brown (10YR 5/3) moist; massive; soft, very friable; few fine irregular pores; slightly effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); clear wavy boundary.  (4 to 15 inches thick) 

    C3--45 to 60 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) loamy sand, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; single grain; loose; very fine roots; few fine irregular pores; slightly effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0). 

TYPE LOCATION:  Maricopa County, Arizona; 930 feet east, 50 feet south of the northwest corner of section 19, T. 2 S., R. 7 E. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 

Soil moisture - Usually dry, intermittently moist in some part of the soil moisture control section during July-August and December-January.  Driest during May and June.  Typic aridic soil moisture regime.

Soil temperature - Averages 72 to 76 degrees F. at a depth of 20 inches. 

Rock fragments - Usually nongravelly, but some pedons average as much as 15 percent. 

Reaction - Slightly to very strongly alkaline

Stratification - Fine sand or loamy fine sand with some strata, 1 cm to 3 inches thick of finer or coarser material. 

Salinity - Nonsaline to strongly saline

Sodicity - Nonsodic to strongly sodic

A horizon
Hue:  10YR, 7.5YR
Value:  5, 6, or 7 dry, 4 or 5 moist
Chroma:  2, 3, or 4, dry or moist
Organic matter: Less than 1 percent, decreases irregularly with depth
Calcium carbonate:  Noneffervescent to strongly effervescent

C horizon
Hue:  10YR, 7.5YR
Value:  4, 5, 6, or 7 dry, 2, 3, 4 or 5 moist
Chroma:  2, 3, or 4, dry or moist
Texture:  Dominantly loamy fine sand or fine sand, with thin strata of coarser or finer textures
Calcium carbonate:  Slightly effervescent to violently effervescent; disseminated or as filaments. 

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Brios (AZ), Coachella (CA), and Nonamewash series.  Brios soils are dominantly coarse sand and loamy coarse sand in the control section.  Coachella soils have hue of 5YR and 2.5YR. Nonamewash soils have gypsum and relict mottles within the control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Vint soils are on flood plains and have slopes of 0 to 3 percent.  They formed in stratified stream alluvium from mixed sources.  Elevations are 230 feet below sea level to 2500 feet above.  The climate is hot, arid continental, having hot summers and mild winters.  July, August and November through March are the months that receive the greatest precipitation.  Mean annual precipitation is about 7 inches and falls as summer thunderstorms and gentle winter rain.  Mean annual air temperature is about 71 degrees F.  The frost-free period is about 240 to 325 days. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Antho, Carrizo, Denure, and Momoli soils.  Antho soils are coarse-loamy.  Carrizo soils are sandy skeletal.  Denure and Momoli soils are coarse-loamy and loamy-skeletal, respectively. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat excessively drained; very slow runoff; moderately rapid permeability. 

USE AND VEGETATION:  Rangeland areas provide limited livestock grazing, but with low carrying capacities, following seasonal rains.  Vegetation is mesquite, catclaw, and annual grasses and weeds.  Irrigated areas are cropped to alfalfa, cotton, small grains, and to a lesser extent, fruits and vegetables such as citrus, nuts, and Irish potatoes. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern Arizona and southeastern California. Vint soils are extensive.  MLRA is 31 and 40.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Eastern Maricopa-Northern Pinal Counties Area, Arizona; 1971. 

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: 

Entisol feature - The absence of diagnostic subsurface horizons

Classified according to Soil Taxonomy Second Edition, 1999; Keys to Soil Taxonomy Tenth Edition, 2006.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
