LOCATION VIVI                   PR

Established Series
Rev. RAB-LHR-JEW
09/2003

VIVI SERIES

The Vivi series consists of deep, somewhat excessively drained soils formed in sediments derived from volcanic rocks.  They are nearly level soils on river flood plains.  These soils typically have very dark grayish brown loam A horizons and dark grayish brown loam B horizons over stratified very fine sandy loam to coarse sand C horizons.  TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, isohyperthermic Fluventic Hapludolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Vivi loam - cultivated sugar cane
                (Colors are for moist soil.)

     Ap--0 to 7 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) loam; weak fine granular structure; very friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; many fine roots; many fine quartz grains; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

     B--7 to 14 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) loam; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; common fine roots; many fine quartz grains; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

     C1--14 to 20 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) very fine sandy loam; massive; friable; few fine roots; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 12 inches thick)

     C2--20 to 30 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) loam; massive; friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; many fine quartz grains; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.  (8 to 14 inches thick)

     C3--30 to 36 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) coarse sand; single grain; loose; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

     C4--36 to 60 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) sandy loam; common medium distinct brown (7.5YR 4/4) mottles; massive; very friable; medium acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Este SCD, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico; 1,000 feet north of kilometer marker 4.3 of Highway 901.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 10 to 20 inches.  The soil ranges from strongly acid to slightly acid.  Coarse fragment content ranges from 0 to 10 percent in subhorizons.  The mean annual soil temperature ranges from 76 to 80 degrees F.

The A horizons have hues of 10YR or 2.5Y, values of 2 or 3, and chroma of 2 or 3.  They are loam or sandy loam and have weak granular or subangular blocky structure.

The B horizons have hues of 10YR or 2.5Y, values of 3 to 6, and chroma of 2 to 4.  They are loam or very fine sandy loam to sandy loam.

The C horizons have hues of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, values of 3 to 5, and chroma of 2 to 4.  They are stratified loam or very fine sandy loam to coarse sand.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other known series in the same family.

The Cornhill, Dique, Limani, Maraquez, Morado, Plata, and Vives series are similar soils in related families.  Cornhill and Vives soils have ustic moisture regimes.  Dique soils have fine-loamy particle-size control sections.  Limani soils have base saturation of less than 50 percent.  Maraquez, Morado, and Plata soils have regular decrease in organic matter with depth.
GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Vivi soils are nearly level on river flood plains.  Slope gradients are 0 to 2 percent.  The soils formed in coarse to medium textured stratified sediments from plutonic rocks.  The climate is humid tropical.  The average annual rainfall ranges from 80 to 90 inches.  The mean annual temperature ranges from 77 to 80 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Coloso, Maunabo, Mayo, Pandura, and Talante soils.  Coloso, Maunabo, and Talante soils are somewhat poorly drained or poorly drained and have more than 18 percent clay in the particle-size control sections.  Mayo soils have base saturation of less than 50 percent and are on terraces or alluvial fans above the flood plain.  Pandura soils are shallow soils on uplands.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat excessively drained.  Runoff is medium to slow.  Permeability is moderately rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Vivi soils are used for the production of sugar cane and minor crops.  Some areas are used for growing pasture.  Native vegetation consists of grasses and brush.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:   Humid river flood plains of Puerto Rico.  The series is of small extent with about 1600 acres.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Puerto Rico; 1942.

REMARKS:

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.


