LOCATION VOLENTE                TX

Established Series
Rev. LEW:CLG:JCW
03/2003

VOLENTE SERIES

 The Volente series consists of deep, well drained, moderately
 slowly permeable soils that formed in calcareous clayey sediments.
 These soils are on nearly level to sloping uplands.  Slopes vary
 from 0 to 8 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, active, thermic Pachic Haplustolls

 TYPICAL PEDON:  Volente silty clay loam--pasture.
                 (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

      A11--0 to 22 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silty clay
 loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; strong fine
 subangular blocky and granular structure; hard, friable; many fine
 limestone fragments on surface, few within horizon; calcareous;
 moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (10 to 30 inches
 thick)

      A12--22 to 36 inches; dark brown (7.5YR 4/2) silty clay, dark
 brown (7.5YR 3/2) moist; moderate fine and medium subangular
 blocky and granular structure; hard, firm but crumbly; few fine
 fragments of limestone; some mixing of above materials in
 earthworm channels; calcareous; moderately alkaline; clear smooth
 boundary.  (10 to 15 inches thick)

      B--36 to 46 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) silty clay, dark brown
 (7.5YR 4/4) moist; weak fine granular structure; hard, friable;
 few fine fragments of limestone; calcareous; moderately alkaline;
 clear smooth boundary.  (8 to 20 inches thick)

      C--46 to 54 inches; reddish yellow (5YR 7/6) clay loam,
 reddish yellow (5YR 6/6) moist; massive; very hard, friable; many
 fine fragments of limestone and strongly cemented concretions of
 calcium carbonate; calcareous; moderately alkaline.

 TYPE LOCATION:  Travis County, Texas, approximately 8 miles north,
 32 degrees west of the State Capitol in Austin, 100 feet west of
 Ranch Road 2222 at a point 0.8 mile northwest of intersection of
 Ranch Road 2222 and Lake Austin Metropolitan Park Road.

 RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the solum ranges from 34
 to about 50 inches.  The mollic epipedon ranges from 20 to 40
 inches in thickness.  Texture of all horizons ranges from silty
 clay loam, clay loam to silty clay, with a clay content ranging
 from 35 to 50 percent.  Fragments of limestone from 1/8 to 3 inch
 range from few to common throughout the pedon.  The matrix is
 calcareous throughout.

 The A horizon has values of 4 or 5, chromas of 2 or 3 in 7.5YR
 hues or values of 3 or 4, chromas of 2, 3 or 4 in 10YR hues.
 Structure ranges from fine granular in the upper part to fine
 subangular blocky and granular in the lower part.

 The B horizon has values of 5 or 6, chroma of 4 in 7.5YR hue or
 values of 5 or 6, chromas ranging from 3 to 8 in 10YR hue.
 Structure is weak fine granular to moderate fine granular and
 subangular blocky.

 The C horizon has values ranging from 4 to 7, chromas 3 to 8 in
 5YR hue, or values ranging from 5 to 8 chromas, 2 to 8 in 7.5YR or
 10YR hue.  In some pedons it contains common limestone pebbles and
 cobbles.

 Competing Series:  These include the Austin, Bippus, Crawford,
 Dale, Denton, Frio, Krum, Lewisville, and San Saba series.  Austin
 soils have more than 40 percent calcium carbonate equivalent in
 and immediately below the mollic epipedon.  Bippus soils have
 fine-loamy control sections.  Crawford and San Saba soils have
 intersecting slickensides and are less than 40 inches thick over
 bedrock.  Dale soils have fine-silty control sections.  Denton and
 Krum soils have coefficient of linear extensibility values of 0.09
 or greater.  Frio soils have organic matter contents that decrease
 irregularly with depth.

 GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Volente soils occur in valleys with slope
 gradients of 0 to 8 percent.  Surfaces are plain to concave.  The
 soil formed in calcareous clayey sediments 4 to 6 feet thick over
 limestone.  The climate is moist subhumid to dry subhumid.  Mean
 annual precipitation ranges from about 20 to 34 inches, mean
 annual air temperature from 64 degrees to 70 degrees F, and
 Thornthwaite P-E indices from 36 to 54.

 GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the competing
 Crawford, Denton, Krum, Lewisville, and San Saba series, and the
 Brackett, Eckrant, Tarpley, and Tarrant series.  Brackett,
 Eckrant, Tarpley, and Tarrant soils have sola less than 20 inches
 thick.

 Drainage and Permeability:  Well drained; slow to rapid runoff;
 moderately slow permeability.

 USE AND VEGETATION:  Used as rangeland, pastureland, and cropland.
 Small grain and grain sorghums are the main crops grown.  Native
 vegetation consists mainly of mid and tall grasses.  Live oak and
 other hardwood overstory varies from scattered to dense.

 DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Texas, possibly Oklahoma.  Most areas
 are in the valleys in the Edwards Plateau where drainage is
 predominantly from the Brackett series.  The series is of moderate
 extent.

 SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Travis County, Texas; 1969.

 REMARKS:  The series would have been classified in the Rendzina
 great soil group.  Volente soils were included in the Krum series.

           National Cooperative Soil Survey
           U. S. A.


