LOCATION CANNONVILLE            UT+AZ

Established Series
REV: HKS/NZ/RLB
06/2006

CANNONVILLE SERIES

The Cannonville series consists of very shallow to shallow to shale, well drained, slowly permeable soils formed in residuum from Tropic shale on ridges and hillsides. Slopes range from 10 to 50 percent. Mean annual temperature is about 47 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation is about 10 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Clayey, smectitic, calcareous, mesic, shallow Ustic Torriorthents

TYPICAL PEDON: Cannonville clay--rangeland. (Colors are for air-dry soil unless otherwise stated).

	A--0 to 7 inches; light olive gray (5Y 6/2) clay, olive gray (5Y 5/2) moist; weak very fine platy structure; soft, firm, sticky, plastic; few fine, medium and coarse roots; common fine and medium pores; strongly calcareous; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); abrupt smooth boundary.

	Cr--7 inches, Tropic Shale soft bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION: Garfield County, Utah about 1 mile east of Tropic; SE 1/4 of sec. 36, T. 36 S., R. 3 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture - dry in parts of the moisture control section for 75 to 90 days during the winter months, and dry in all parts of the moisture control section 65 to 75 percent of the time when the soil temperature at a 20 inch depth is more than 41 degrees F. Ustic aridic moisture regime.

Mean annual soil temperature - 47 to 56 degrees F.

Mean summer temperature - 62 to 65 degrees F.

Depth to Tropic shale - 4 to 20 inches.

Particle-size control section -

Clay content: 40 to 50 percent 

Effervescence: strongly calcareous or very strongly calcareous.

Reaction: moderately alkaline or strongly alkaline.


A horizon 
Hue:  10YR, 5Y or 2.5Y 
Value:  5 to 7 dry and 4 or 5 moist.
Effervescence: strongly calcareous or very strongly calcareous.
Reaction: moderately alkaline or strongly alkaline.

C horizon (when present) 
Hue:  10YR, 5Y or 2.5Y 
Value:  5 to 7 dry and 4 to 6 moist
Chroma: 2 or 4.

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Danko (WY), Midway (CO), Orella (NE), Samday (WY), and Zyme (CO) series. 
Danko soils have hue redder than 10YR and more than 15 percent exchangeable sodium. 
Midway, Samday and Zyme are dry 50 to 65 percent of the time that the soil temperature at a depth of 20 inches is 41 degrees F. or higher.
Orella soils are strongly alkaline and sodic; receive 10 to 20 inches of precipitation and the particle size control section range from 38 to 65 percent clay.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Cannonville soils are on ridges and hillsides. Slopes range from 10 to 50 percent. The soils formed in residuum from shale. The mean annual temperature is 45 to 55 degrees F. Average annual precipitation is 8 to 12 inches and is distributed fairly evenly throughout the year with about 55 percent falling between April and September. July, August and September are the wettest months, with April, May and June being the driest. Elevation is 4,800 to 6,600 feet. The freeze-free period is 100 to 160 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are Baldfield, Befar, Henrieville, Mikim, and Yarts soils. Baldfield and Befar soils are very deep and fine textured, and are on valley plains. Henrieville and Yarts soils are very deep and coarse-loamy and are on alluvial fans. Mikim soils are very deep and fine-loamy and are on alluvial fans.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained; rapid runoff; slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION: The Cannonville soils are used for rangeland and wildlife habitat. Potential vegetation is black sagebrush, Indian ricegrass, bottlebrush squirreltail, and roundleaf buffaloberry.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Cannonville soils are of small extent. They are mapped in the Tropic-Henrieville area of Garfield County. MLRA 35.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Garfield County (Panguitch Soil Survey Area), Utah, 1985.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - The zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 7 inches. (A horizon)

Paralithic contact - The boundary at 7 inches. (Cr horizon)

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
