LOCATION CANQUYA                AZ

Inactive Series
Rev. DWD/PDC
09/2007

CANQUYA SERIES

The Canquya series consists of shallow to unweathered bedrock, well drained soils that formed in colluvium and residuum from dacitic tuff, dacitic breccia and tuffaceous dacite lava.  Canquya soils are on hill and mountain side slopes.  Slopes range from 30 to 75 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 20 inches and the mean annual air temperature is about 58 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, thermic Aridic Lithic Haplustolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Canquya very gravelly sandy loam - recreation and wildlife habitat.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

     A--0 to 3 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/2) very gravelly sandy loam, dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few very fine and fine roots; common very fine irregular and few fine tubular pores; 45 percent gravel, 10 percent cobble; noneffervescent; slightly acid (pH 6.2) clear smooth boundary. (3 to 12 inches thick)

    Bw--3 to 13 inches; reddish gray (5YR 5/2) very cobbly sandy clay loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/2) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure parting to moderate very fine and fine granular; slightly hard, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common very fine and few fine, medium and coarse roots; common very fine irregular pores; 20 percent gravel, 35 percent cobble; noneffervescent; slightly acid (pH 6.4); abrupt irregular boundary. (7 to 13 inches thick)

    R--13 inches; hard, slightly fractured dacite tuff; more than 4 inches between fractures with very few roots matted in fractures.

TYPE LOCATION:  Coronado National Memorial; located at a latitude of 31 degrees, 20 minutes, 36 seconds North and longitude of 110 degrees, 15 minutes, 31 seconds West.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture:  Intermittently moist in some part of the soil moisture control section during July - September and December - February.  Driest during May and June.  Aridic ustic soil moisture regime.

Soil Temperature:  59 to 64 degrees F.

Rock fragments:  averages 45 to 60 percent

Clay content:  averages 18 to 27 percent

Organic matter content:  1 to 5 percent

Depth to unweathered bedrock:  10 to 20 inches

Some pedons have a 1 to 3 inch thick horizon of paralithic material over the unweathered bedrock

A horizon
Value:  4 or 5 dry, 2.5 or 3 moist
Chroma:  2 or 3, dry or moist
Reaction:  slightly acid or neutral

Bw horizon
Hue:  2.5YR, 5YR
Value:  4 or 5 dry, 2.5 or 3 moist
Chroma:  2 or 3, dry or moist
Texture:  sandy loam, sandy clay loam
Reaction:  moderately acid or slightly acid

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Brewster (TX), Budlamp (AZ), Siphoncan (AZ) and Yarbam (AZ) series.  Brewster soils formed in colluvium from rhyolite, trachyte, and basalt. Budlamp and Yarbam soils contain less than 18 percent clay in the control section. and in addition Yarbam soils have a calcium carbonate equivalent of 20 to 40 percent. Siphoncan soils formed in residuum and colluvium from granite and are noncalcareous.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Canquya soils are on hill and mountain side slopes at elevations of 5200 to 6800 feet.  Slopes range from 30 to 75 percent.   These soils formed in colluvium and residuum from dacitic tuff, dacitic breccia and tuffaceous dacite lava.  The mean annual precipitation is 18 to 23 inches and occurs as thunderstorms during July to September and as gentle rains during December to February.  The mean annual air temperature is 57 to 62 degrees F.  The frost-free period is 160 to 210 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Morimount (T), Tomarizo (T), Zaleska (T) and the competing Yarbam soils.  Morimount and Tomarizo soils have an ochric epipedon and in addition Tomarizo soils have an argillic horizon.  Zaleska soils have an argillic horizon with more than 35 percent clay.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium to rapid runoff; moderately rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used for recreation and wildlife habitat.  Vegetation includes bullgrass, Texas bluestem, sotol, Emory oak, sideoats grama, plains lovegrass, beggartick threeawn and Arizona white oak.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern Arizona.  Canquya soils are of limited extent. MLRA is 41.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Cochise County, Arizona.  Soil survey of Coronado National Memorial; 1996.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - The zone from 0 to 13 inches (A and Bw horizons)

Lithic contact - The zone from 13 to 15 inches (R horizon)
Classification changed from loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, thermic Lithic Haplustolls to loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, thermic Aridic Lithic Haplustolls in 2006.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
