LOCATION CARDOVA                VA+WV

Established Series
JDH/Rev. MDJ
03/2022

CARDOVA SERIES

The Cardova series consists of moderately deep, well drained soils, with moderate permeability, on uplands in the Northern Piedmont and Northern Blue Ridge. The soil formed in residuum of graphitic phyllite or graphitic phyllite interbedded with arkosic metasandstone, meta-arkose, or metasiltstone. Slopes range from 2 to 45 percent. Mean annual precipitation is about 40 inches, and the mean annual temperature is about 55 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, semiactive, mesic Typic Hapludults

TYPICAL PEDON: Cardova gravelly loam on a 12 percent south facing slope at an elevation of approximately 480 feet (Colors are for moist soils unless otherwise stated)

 A--0 to 20 cm (0 to 8 inches); dark gray (N 4/0) gravelly loam; moderate medium granular structure; very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine and fine, few medium and coarse roots throughout; few fine low-continuity interstitial pores and few fine moderate continuity tubular pores; 2 percent subangular schist channers and 30 percent subangular schist medium and coarse gravel; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. 

 Bt--20 to 48 cm (8 to 19inches); very dark gray (N 3/0) gravelly loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few very fine, fine, medium, and common coarse roots throughout; few fine low-continuity interstitial pores and few fine moderate-continuity tubular pores; many faint discontinuous very dark gray (N 3/0), moist, clay films on faces of peds; 20 percent subangular schist coarse gravel; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. 

 BC--48 to 66 cm (19 to 26 inches); very dark gray (N 3/0) gravelly loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine, medium, and coarse roots; few fine low-continuity interstitial pores and few fine moderate-continuity tubular pores; common faint patchy very dark gray (N 3/0), moist, clay films on rock fragments; 15 percent subangular schist coarse gravel; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. 

 C-- 66 to 84 cm (26 to 33 inches); very dark gray (N 3/0) very cobbly loam; massive; friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine and medium roots throughout; few fine low-continuity interstitial pores and few fine moderate-continuity tubular pores; 50 percent subangular schist cobbles; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary. 

 Cr-- 84 to 112 (33 to 44 inches); soft bedrock in shades of gray and brown that crushes to a silt loam; 55 percent angular schist fragments; clear wavy boundary.

 R--112 cm (44 inches); hard bedrock in shades of gray and brown.

TYPE LOCATION: 
County: Culpeper
State: Virginia
USGS Quadrangle: Castleton
Latitude: 38 degrees 31 minutes 32.3 seconds N
Longitude: 78 degrees 0 minutes 49.9 seconds W
Directions to the pedon: From Cardova, southeast 3.54 km (2.2 miles) on Rt. 729, north-northwest 1097 m (3600 feet) on Rt. 638. Site is 274 km (900 feet) east in woods

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 
Solum thickness is 50 to 100 cm (20 to 40 inches). 
Thickness of the argillic horizon is 25 to 50 cm (10 to 20 inches). 
Depth to paralithic contact is 50 to 100 cm (20 to 40 inches). 
Depth to lithic contact is 100 to 150 cm (40 to 60 inches). 
Depth to seasonal high water table is greater than 150 cm (60 inches). 
Reaction ranges from extremely acid to strongly acid throughout. 
Rock fragments consist of subangular and angular gravels and cobbles of graphitic schist.
Depth Class:

Range of Individual Horizons:
A Horizon
Color--hue 10YR through 5Y, value of 3 through 5, chroma 0 to 3
Texture--silt loam or loam

Rock fragment content ranges from 0 to 40 percent.

Bt horizon
Color--hue of 10YR through 5Y or neutral, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 0 to 6. 
Texture--loam, silt loam, silty clay loam or clay loam. 
Rock fragment content ranges from 5 to 50 percent.

BC horizon
Color--hue of neutral, value of 3, and chroma of 0.
Texture--loam. 
Rock fragment content ranges from 15 to 60 percent.

C horizon
Color--hue of 2.5Y, 5Y, or is neutral, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 0 to 3.
Texture--sandy loam, loam, or silt loam.
Rock fragment content ranges from 20 to 65 percent.

COMPETING SERIES: Allegheny, Allenwood, Cades, Chetwynd, Drapermill, Elsinboro, Frankstown, Gilpin, Gilwood, Glenelg, Happyland, Leck Kill, Lonon, Murrill, Nixon, Queponco, Reybold, Rhodhiss, Shouns, Tate, Ungers and Whiteford soils are in the same family. Allegheny, Allenwood, Cades, Elsinboro, Glenelg, Happyland, Lonon, Murrill, Reybold, Rhodhiss, Shouns, Tate and Whiteford soils are very deep to lithic or paralithic contact. Allegheny, Cades and Elsinboro soils formed in alluvium on stream terraces. Allenwood soils formed in glacial till. Glenelg soils formed in residuum of micaceous schist in the Northern Piedmont. Happyland soils formed in residuum of phyllite, schist, gneiss and metamonzonite in the Northern Piedmont. Lonon soils formed in colluvium and alluvium of metasedimentary rocks in the Southern Appalachian Mountains. Murrill soils formed in colluvium of acid sandstone and shale and underlying limestone. Reybold soils formed in silty eolian deposits underlain by fluvio-marine sediments. Rhodhiss soils formed in residuum of felsic crystalline rocks in the Southern Piedmont. Shouns soils formed in colluvium of sandstone, siltstone and shale. Tate soil formed in colluvium and alluvium of felsic to mafic crystalline rock in the Southern Appalachian Mountains. Whiteford soils formed in residuum of dark colored slate. Frankstown, Leck Kill and Ungers soils are deep or very deep to lithic or paralithic contact. Frankstown soils formed in residuum of siliceous limestone and interbedded limy shale and siltstone. Leck Kill soils formed in residuum or glacial till of red shale, siltstone and sandstone. Ungers soils formed in residuum of red sandstone and shale. Nixon and Quesponco are deep to lithic or paralithic contact. Nixon soils formed in old alluvium containing red shale fragments and coastal plain materials. Queponco soils formed in loamy fluvial and eolian deposits underlain by sandy and loamy fluvial and marine deposits. Drapermill soils formed in residuum of phyllite and schist in the Southern Piedmont. Gilwood soils formed in residuum of siltstone in the Kentucky and Indiana Sandstone and Shale Hills ands Valleys. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landscape:  Mountains and Hills
Landform:  Mountain and Hill
MLRA(s): 130A and 148
Geographic Component: Interfluve, crest, sideslope
Hillslope Profile Position:  Summit, shoulder, backslope
Parent Material: Residuum from graphitic phyllite, arkosic metasandstone, meta-arkose, metasiltstone, schist
Slope: 0 to 45 percent
Elevation: 200 to 1000 feet
Frost- Free period: 167 to 203 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature: 53 to 56 degrees F
Mean Annual Precipitation: 36-45 inches

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
Glenelg and Edgemont soils, which have brown subsoils and are deeper to bedrock, form on similar landscape positions. Elioak and Culpeper soils, which have red subsoils with more clay and are deeper to bedrock, form on similar landscape positions. Hazel soils, which have sandy subsoils, form on similar landscape positions. Meadowville soils, which have brown subsoils and are shallower to seasonal high water table, form in drainageways. Marbleyard soils, which develop from arkosic metasandstone, form on similar landscape positions.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:
Drainage Class (Agricultural):   Well drained. 
Surface Runoff: very low through very high. 
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity: Moderately high to high
Permeability (Obsolete):  moderately slow to moderately rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION: 
Major Uses: mainly in woodlands. Small areas are used for cropland, hay, and pasture.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: 
MLRA 148 in Virginia and 130A in West Virginia.  
Extent: small

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES PROPOSED: Culpeper County, Virginia. 2003.

REMARKS: Cardova soils were previously included in the Watt series. 

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: 
1) Ochric epipedon - The zone from the surface to 20 cm (8 inches (A horizons)) 
2) Argillic horizon - The zone from 20 to 48 cm (8 to 21 inches (Bt horizon)
3) Paralithic contact - at 84 cm (33 inches (Cr horizon))
4) Lithic contact - at 112 cm (44 inches (R horizon))

2016 Update was to change series to established and include West Virginia in extent.  Update formatting.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
