LOCATION CARNERO                NM+OK WY

Established Series
Rev. SPS-HBM-JBC-ACT
12/2022

CARNERO SERIES

The Carnero series consists of moderately deep, well drained, moderately slowly permeable soils that formed in medium and moderately fine-textured residuum from sandstone with addition of eolian sediments. Carnero soils are on rolling uplands hills, ridges, and nearly level mesa tops and have slopes of 0 to 8 percent. The mean annual air temperature is about 51 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is about 16 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, superactive, mesic Aridic Argiustolls

TYPICAL PEDON: Carnero loam, rangeland. (colors are for dry soils unless otherwise stated.)

    A--0 to 3 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) loam, dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few medium and common fine and very fine roots; neutral; clear smooth boundary. (2 to 6 inches thick)

    Bt1--3 to 9 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) light clay loam, dark brown (7.5YR 3/3) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, sticky and plastic; few medium and common fine and very fine roots; many thin clay films on faces of peds; neutral; clear smooth boundary. (3 to 7 inches thick)

    Bt2--9 to 13 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) heavy clay loam, brown (7.5YR 4/3) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable, slightly sticky and plastic; few medium and common fine and very fine roots; continuous thin clay films on faces of peds; neutral; clear smooth boundary. (3 to 8 inches thick)

    Bt3--13 to 22 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) clay, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; strong medium subangular blocky structure; hard, firm, sticky and plastic; few medium and common fine and very fine roots; continuous moderately thick clay films on faces of peds; neutral; clear wavy boundary. (4 to 12 inches thick)

    Bt4--22 to 28 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) clay, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; strong medium subangular blocky structure; hard, firm, sticky and plastic; few medium and common fine and very fine roots; continuous moderately thick clay films on faces of peds; 10 percent gravel with some pebbles coated with carbonate; neutral; abrupt wavy boundary. (0 to 13 inches thick)

    R--28 inches; fractured hard sandstone bedrock with calcium carbonate coatings on underside of fragments.

TYPE LOCATION: Union County, New Mexico; approximately 13 miles west and 4 miles north of the village of Clapham, center of section 14, T. 23 N., R. 31 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 
Solum thickness:16 to 40 inches.
Depth to bedrock: 20 to 40 inches.

A horizon
Hue: 7.5YR or 10YR 
Value: 4 or 5 dry, 2 or 3 moist
Chroma: 2 or 3 moist. 
Coarse fragments: 0 to 5 percent sandstone fragments. 
Reaction: neutral or slightly alkaline.

Bt1 horizon
Hue, value and chroma and texture similar to the A horizon.

Lower Bt horizons
Hue: 7.5YR or  10YR
Value: 4 or 5 dry, 3 to 5 moist
Chroma: 2 to 4. 
Texture: clay loam, silty clay or clay.
Clay content: 35 to 50 percent 
Coarse fragments: 0 to 10 percent sandstone gravel. 
Structure: moderate or strong subangular blocky or moderate medium prismatic
Effervescence: noncalcareous, increasing in some pedons to strongly effervescent in the lower part. 
Reaction: neutral to moderately alkaline.

A  C horizon occurs in some pedons.  Where present, colors are similar to the Bt horizon. Texture: sandy clay loam or clay.

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Concho and  Quivera series.  Soils that are potential competitors were activity class assigned are the Abrazo (NM), Cantina (NM), Celsosprings (NM), Charette (NM), Cueva ((NM), Partri (AZ), Remunda (NM), and Philmont (NM) series.

Concho and Quivera soils: are very deep.
Abrazo soils: do not have free carbonates in the profile and contain coarse fragments of igneous origin in the particle size control section.
Cantina soils: have basalt bedrock between 40 and 60 inches of the surface and developed in materials derived from igneous rock.
Celsosprings soils: contain between 15 and 35 percent coarse fragments in the particle size control section and are deep or very deep.
Charette, Remunda, and Philmont soils: are very deep or deep.
Cueva soils: have hue of 5YR or redder in the Bt horizon.
Partri soils: are very deep and contain more calcium carbonate in the lower part.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The Carnero soils are on rolling upland hills and ridges and nearly level mesa tops where elevation ranges from 4,300 to 7,000 feet. The soils formed in medium and moderately fine-texture residuum that weathered from noncalcareous sandstone and has had additions of eolian material and calcium carbonate. The climate is semiarid continental. The mean annual precipitation is 14 to 18 inches with a summer maximum. The mean annual temperature is 46 degrees to 53 degrees F., and the average summer temperature is 70 degrees F. The frost-free season is 140 to 180 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Bernal, Escabosa, Hagerman, Partri, and Travessilla soils. Bernal and Travessilla soils are shallower than 20 inches. Travessilla soils do not have an argillic horizon. Escabosa soils do not have an argillic horizon and have a calcic horizon. Hagerman soils do not have a mollic epipedon.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained; runoff is negligible on slopes less than 1 percent, low on 1 to 5 percent slopes and medium on 5 to 8 percent slopes; moderately slow or slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION: These soils are used mainly for rangeland, but some areas are dry farmed to some extent. The principal vegetation is blue grama, western wheatgrass, galleta, buffalograss, yucca, and a few junipers.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Northern and central New Mexico, northwestern Oklahoma, and possibly southern Colorado. The series is of large extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Eastern New Mexico Reconnaissance SCS W-58 New Mexico, 1937.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon: 0 to 9 inches.  (A and Bt1 horizons)
Argillic horizon: 3 to 28 inches.  (Bt horizons)
Lithic contact: at 28 inches with hard sandstone bedrock

Taxonomic version: Soil Taxonomy, Second Edition, 1999

ADDITIONAL DATA: none

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
