LOCATION CHEYENNE               NE+CO MT WY

Established Series
Rev. LGR
04/2005

CHEYENNE SERIES

The Cheyenne series consists of moderately deep soils over sand and gravel. They are well drained, moderately over very rapidly permeable soils on stream terraces. They formed in loamy alluvium derived from mixed sedimentary and igneous material. Slopes range from 0 to 3 percent. The mean annual precipitation is about 16 inches, and the mean annual temperature is about 49 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy over sandy or sandy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, mesic Aridic Haplustolls

TYPICAL PEDON: Cheyenne loam - cultivated cropland. (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

  Ap--0 to 6 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; weak fine granular structure; soft, friable; few pebbles; neutral; clear smooth boundary. (4 to 8 inches thick)

  AB--6 to 10 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak and moderate medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; few thin patchy films on faces of peds; slightly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary. (3 to 7 inches thick)

  Bw--10 to 24 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) loam, dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4) moist; weak and moderate, coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate, medium subangular blocky; hard, friable; thin patchy to nearly continuous films on faces of peds; thin lime crust on the underside of gravel; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary. (12 to 16 inches thick)

  C--24 to 32 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) gravelly loamy sand, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; single grain; loose; strong effervescence with gravel generally crusted with lime on the undersides; strongly alkaline; gradual smooth boundary. (6 to 10 inches thick)

  2C--32 to 60 inches; very gravelly coarse sand; loose; strong effervescence.

TYPE LOCATION: Kimball County, Nebraska; 410 feet west and 250 feet south of the northeast corner, sec. 34, T. 15 N., R. 56 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 
Thickness of the mollic epipedon:  7 to 15 inches and includes the upper part of the B horizon 
Depth to carbonates:  20 to 30 inches 
Depth to sand and/or gravel 20 to 40 inches

The A horizon:
Hue: 10YR 
Value: 4 or 5 dry and 2 or 3 moist 
Chroma: 1 through 3 
Texture: loam, silt loam or fine sandy loam 
Reaction: neutral or slightly alkaline

AB horizon:
Hue of 10YR 
Value: 3 or 4 dry and 2 or 3 moist
Chroma: 1 through 3

Bw horizon:
Hue: 10YR, value of 5 dry and 3 moist
Chroma: 3 or 4 
Bw horizon:  loam or light clay loam averaging between 18 and 30 percent clay
Some pedons include horizons of heavy sandy loam 
Brownish films are usually on structural faces, but seldom, if ever, thick and continuous

A Bk horizon is in some pedons when depth to the 2C horizon exceeds about 30 inches
Reaction: slightly or moderately alkaline

C horizon:
Texture:  gravelly loamy sand, thin strata of other sandy textures are common

2C horizon:
Texture: calcareous, loose, gravelly coarse sand or very gravelly coarse sand

COMPETING SERIES: 
This is the Sycle series.
Sycle soils have hues greater than 10YR.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: 
Landscape: stream terraces
Landform: plain
Parent material: loamy alluvium, derived originally from mixed sedimentary and igneous materials of Pleistocene and Recent age. In places, loess or local alluvium has been added to or altered the upper horizons
Slope: 0 to 3 percent 
Mean annual temperature:  47 to 51 degrees F 
Mean annual precipitation: 14 to 18 inches

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  
Altvan soils are on adjacent uplands  
Tripp soils are deep soils on stream terraces

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: 
Drainage. well drained 
Permeability:  moderate in the solum and very rapid in the underlying mixed sand and gravel Runoff:  slow or medium

USE AND VEGETATION: Corn, alfalfa, small grain and sugar beets are the principal crops grown. Some areas are irrigated.
Where in range, the native vegetation consists mainly of mid and short grasses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Nebraska and eastern Colorado. The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Denver, Colorado

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Reconnaissance Soil Survey of Western South Dakota, 1909.

REMARKS: The Cheyenne soils were classified as Chestnut Soils in the former system. Diagnostic horizons or features recognized in this pedon are: mollic epipedon--the zone from 0 to 10 inches (Ap and AB horizon); cambic horizon--the zone from 10 to 24 inches (Bw horizon).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
