LOCATION CITICO                 TN+NC

Established Series
Rev. RLL:NTH:DLN
04/2001

CITICO SERIES

The Citico series consists of deep, well drained soils on foot slopes, benches, 
in coves, and on lower parts of mountain slopes.  They formed in colluvium 
weathered from metasedimentary rocks such as phyllite, slate, and slightly 
metamorphosed shale, siltstone, or sandstone.  Slopes range from 15 to 65 
percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Fine-loamy, mixed, semiactive, mesic Typic Dystrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Citico channery silt loam - forested.  (Colors are for moist 
soil unless otherwise stated.)

 Oe-0 to 1 inch; nearly black partially decomposed organic mat of pine needles 
and hardwood leaves.

 A-1 to 3 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) channery silt loam; 
moderate medium granular structure; friable; many fine and medium roots; 15 
percent phyllite channers by volume; strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (1 
to 4 inches thick)

 BA-3 to 8 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) channery silt loam; moderate medium granular 
and weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and medium 
roots; 20 percent phyllite channers by volume; strongly acid; gradual wavy 
boundary.  (0 to 8 inches thick)

 Bw-8 to 20 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) channery silt loam; weak medium 
subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and medium roots; 20 percent 
phyllite channers by volume; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (10 to 18 
inches thick)

 BC-20 to 39 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) channery silt loam; weak medium 
subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and medium roots; 20 percent 
phyllite channers by volume; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (12 to 24 
inches thick)

 C-39 to 49 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) very channery silt loam; massive; friable; 
few fine roots; 35 percent phyllite channers and 5 percent flagstones by volume; 
strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (8 to 16 inches thick)

 R-49 inches; hard phyllite bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Monroe County, Tennessee; 6 miles southeast of Tellico Plains on 
Old Furnace Road; .75 miles northeast of Holder Cemetery.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 30 to 50 inches and depth 
to hard bedrock ranges from 40 to 60 inches.  Channers, gravels, and flagstones 
of phyllite, slate, or other fine grained metasedimentary rocks  range from 15 
to 35 percent by volume in the solum and from 15 to 50 percent by volume in the 
C horizon.  Reaction is very strongly acid to moderately acid throughout.  

 The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Horizons 
with value 3 have a thickness of less than 7 inches.  Texture of the fine earth 
is silt loam or loam.

 The Bw horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 6,  Texture 
of the fine earth is silt loam or loam.

 The C horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 to 6.  Few or 
common mottles in shades of gray or brown may be present.  Texture of the fine 
earth is silt loam or loam.

 Transitional horizons occur between the major horizons in many pedons.  They 
have properties and features similar to adjacent horizons.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other competing series.  The Brecksville, Irma, 
and Muskingum series are in closely related families.  Brecksville and Muskingum 
soils have a paralithic contact at 20 to 40 inches.  Irma soils have bedrock 
greater than 60 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Citico soils are on foot slopes, benches, in coves, and on 
lower parts of mountain slopes in the Blue Ridge Mountains, particularly in the 
Unaka Mountain Range.  They formed in colluvium from metasedimentary rocks 
including phyllite, slate, and slightly metamorphosed shale, siltstone, or 
sandstone.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Brasstown, Brookshire, Cataska, 
Ditney, Jeffrey, Junaluska, Keener, Maymead, Soco, Spivey, Sylco, and Unicoi 
series.  Brasstown, Cataska, Ditney, Jeffrey, Junaluska, Soco, and Sylco soils 
are on adjacent ridges and upper side slopes and formed in residuum.  
Brookshire, Keener, Maymead, and Spivey soils are on landscapes similar to 
Citico soils.  Brasstown, Junaluska, and Keener soils have argillic horizons.  
Brookshire and Jeffrey soils have dark surface horizons with color value and 
chroma of 3 or less 7 to 10 inches thick.  Cataska soils have a paralithic 
contact within 20 inches.  Ditney and Soco soils have a lithic contact between 
20 and 40 inches and are in coarse-loamy families.  Soco soils have a paralithic 
contact between 20 and 40 inches.  Maymead soils are in a coarse-loamy family.  
Spivey soils have an umbric epipedon.  Unicoi soils are in a loamy-skeletal 
family and have a lithic contact within 20 inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium or rapid runoff; moderate 
permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Practically all areas are in forest.  White pine, yellow 
poplar, eastern hemlock, white oak, northern red oak, red maple, and yellow 
birch are dominant in the overstory.  Rhododendron, sweetball, and hydrangea are 
common in the understory.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Blue Ridge Mountains, in Tennessee and possibly in 
North Carolina and Virginia.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Monroe County, Tennessee; 1974.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon (after mixing) - 1 to 8 inches

Cambic horizon - 8 to 20 inches

Lithic contact - 49 inches

ADDITIONAL DATA:  SIR=TN0072

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
