LOCATION CLAREMORE              OK

Established Series
Rev.  JWF
09/2012

CLAREMORE SERIES

The Claremore series consists of shallow, well drained, moderately permeable upland soils that formed in material weathered from limestone of Pennsylvanian age.  These soils are on nearly level
to gently sloping convex uplands in the Cherokee Prairies.  Slopes are 0 to 5 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is 38 inches.  Mean annual temperature is 60 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, mixed, superactive, thermic Lithic Argiudolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Claremore silt loam--rangeland.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
stated.)

     A1--0 to 8 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) silt loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/3) dry; moderate medium granular structure; friable, slightly hard; medium acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (5
to 10 inches thick)

     B1--8 to 12 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) silty clay loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/3) dry; strong medium granular
structure; friable, hard; medium acid; gradual smooth boundary.
(0 to 6 inches thick)

     B2t--12 to 18 inches; dark reddish brown (2.5YR 3/4) silty
clay loam, reddish brown (2.5YR 4/4) dry; strong fine and medium subangular blocky structure; firm, hard; thin nearly continuous
clay films on faces of peds; medium acid; abrupt wavy boundary.
(4 to 10 inches thick)

     R--18 to 20 inches; hard limestone bedrock with fractures
three to four feet apart filled with dark reddish brown (2.5YR
3/4) silty clay loam in the upper part.

TYPE LOCATION:  Rogers County, Oklahoma; approximately 2 miles
south and 9 miles west of Claremore; 100 feet west and 125 feet
south of the northeast corner of sec. 26, T. 21 N., R. 14 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness and depth to limestone bedrock ranges from 10 to 20 inches.

The A horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma
of 2 or 3.  Texture is silt loam, loam, or silty clay loam.
Coarse fragments of limestone less than 76 mm in diameter make up
0 to 5 percent by volume.  Reaction is medium or slightly acid.

The B1 horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma
of 2 to 4.  Texture is silt loam or silty clay loam.  Coarse fragments of limestone less than 76 mm in diameter make up 0 to 5 percent by volume.  Reaction is medium or slightly acid.

The B2t horizon has hue of 2.5YR to 7.5YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 3 to 6.  Texture is silty clay loam or clay loam.
Coarse fragments of limestone less than 76 mm in diameter make up
0 to 5 percent by volume.  Reaction ranges from medium acid to neutral.

The R layer is hard limestone bedrock that is fractured at
intervals of 3 feet or more, and the upper parts of the wider
cracks are filled with soil material similar to the B2t horizon.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other competing series in this family.  Soils in similar families are the Caspiana, Catoosa, Clareson, Collinsville, Dardanelle, Deepwater, Fitzhugh, Lenapah, Lula, Mason, Mer Rouge, Nowata, Okay, Shidler, and Tiptonville series.  Caspiana, Catoosa, Clareson, Dardanelle, Deepwater, Fitzhugh, Lula, Mason, Mer Rouge, Nowata, Okay, and Tiptonville
soils do not have a lithic contact within 20 inches of the
surface.  Collinsville and Shidler soils do not have B2t horizons.  Lenapah soils have a clayey control section and montmorillonitic mineralogy.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Claremore soils are on nearly level or gently sloping convex ridgetops or upland flats in the Cherokee Prairies.  Slopes are 0 to 5 percent.  These soils formed in material
weathered from limestone of Pennsylvanian age.  The climate is
moist, subhumid, or humid.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from
33 to 44 inches.  Mean annual temperature is 57 to 64 degrees F.  Thornthwaite annual P-E indices range from 50 to 70.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Catoosa, Lenapah, Lula, Nowata, and Shidler series and Newtonia and Summit series.  Catoosa, Lenapah, Lula, Newtonia, Nowata, and Shidler
soils occur on broad ridgetops.  Newtonia and Summit soils do not have a lithic contact within 20 inches of the surface.  In
addition, Summit soils have more than 35 percent clay content in
the control section and occur mainly on side slopes below the ridgetops.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow to medium runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mainly used for range.  The native vegetation
is a mixture of tall and mid grass prairie.  Minor acreage is cultivated to small grains or tame pasture.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Cherokee Prairie of Oklahoma, Kansas,
and Missouri.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Indianapolis, Indiana

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Rogers County, Oklahoma; 1964.

                 National Cooperative Soil Survey
                             U. S. A.
