LOCATION CLUNIE                 AK

Established Series
Rev. KMO/JPM/DLM
02/2022

CLUNIE SERIES

Depth class: very deep
Drainage class: very poorly drained
Parent material: fibrous peat over loamy, silty, or clayey tidal sediments
Landform: tidal plains or depressions on tidal plains
Slopes: 0 to 2 percent
Mean average annual precipitation: 19 to 29 inches
Mean annual temperature: about 33 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, mixed, euic Terric Cryofibrists

TYPICAL PEDON: Clunie peat -- on a 0 percent slope at 15 feet elevation under moss and sedge vegetation.  (all colors are for moist soil)

    Oi1 -- 0 to 3 inches; raw moss and sedge peat; many fine and medium roots; very strongly acid (pH 4.7); clear smooth boundary.

    Oi2 -- 3 to 11 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) sphagnum moss and sedge peat; 90 percent fiber rubbed; 5 percent woody fragments; very strongly acid (pH 4.7); clear smooth boundary.

    Oi3 -- 11 to 33 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) sphagnum moss and sedge peat; 5 percent woody fragments; very strongly acid (pH 4.7); abrupt smooth boundary. (Combined thickness of the O horizons is 24 to 40 inches thick)

    2C -- 33 to 63 inches; dark gray (N 4/0) silty clay loam; massive; firm; 5 percent decomposed organic matter in thin strata; few fine roots; neutral (pH 6.7).

TYPE LOCATION:  Yentna Area, Alaska. SW 1/4, SW 1/4, Section 31, T. 8 N., R. 15 W., Seward Meridian.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Depth to mineral material ranges from 24 to 40 inches
Water table: at or near the surface from May through September
Surface tier: is slightly decomposed moss and sedge peat that is less than three-fourths Sphagnum fibers
Buried logs and branches: occur in some pedons
The pH (0.01M CaCl2): 4.5 or greater within parts of the control section.

The O horizons:
Matrix color: hue from 5YR to 10Y; value 3 to 5; chroma 1 to 4
Wood fragments: 0 to 10 percent
Reaction class: very strongly acid to slightly acid

2C horizon: gleyed colors of gray, greenish gray, and bluish gray
Texture: silty clay loam, silt loam, silt loam stratified with silt, silty clay loam, and very fine sandy loam; weighted average of 20 to 35 percent clay.  Reaction class: from moderately acid to neutral

COMPETING SERIES: This is the Hufman series. Hufman soils have a mean annual soil temperature of less than 30 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Depth class: very deep
Drainage class: very poorly drained
Parent material: fibrous peat over loamy, silty, or clayey tidal sediments
Landform: tidal plains or depressions on tidal plains
Slopes: 0 to 2 percent
Mean annual temperature: about 33 degrees F.
Mean average annual precipitation: 19 to 29 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are Kroto, Spenard, and Strandline soils. Kroto and Strandline soils are well drained and occur on hills and moraines. Spenard soils are very deep and very poorly drained mineral soils that occur on moraines and hills.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Very poorly drained, ponded to very high runoff. Saturated hydraulic conductivity is high to very high in the organic materials and moderately low in the mineral underlying material.

USE AND VEGETATION: The Clunie soils are used for wildlife habitat and recreation.  The native vegetation is mosses, sedges, rushes, and low growing woody shrubs.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: MLRA 224 Cook Inlet Lowlands, Southcentral Alaska.  The series is of moderate extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: WASILLA, ALASKA

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Kenai-Kasilof Area, Alaska.  1960.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this profile include: Organic material: 0 to 33 inches
Mineral material: 33 to 63 inches with less than 35 percent clay
Organic material reaction class: 4.5 (0.01M CaCl) or greater in parts of the control section.
Temperature regime: cryic
Moisture regime: aquic

ADDITIONAL DATA:

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
