LOCATION COLEMANTOWN            NJ+MD

Established Series
SCK/Rev. JWB
11/2015

COLEMANTOWN SERIES

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, glauconitic, mesic Typic Albaquults
Depth Class: Very deep
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Poorly drained
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity Class: Moderately low or low
Landscape: Northern Atlantic Coastal Plain
Parent Material: Glauconite bearing fluviomarine deposits
Slope: 0 to 2 percent
Mean Annual Air Temperature (type location): 13 degrees C. (56 degrees F.)
Mean Annual Precipitation (type location): 1143 mm (45 inches) 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, glauconitic, mesic Typic Albaquults 

TYPICAL PEDON: Colemantown loam (in an area of Colemantown loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes), in previously cultivated woodland. (Colors are for moist soil.) 

 Ap--0 to 25 cm (0 to 10 inches), olive gray (5Y 4/2) loam, light yellowish brown (2.5Y 6/3) dry; moderate medium granular structure; friable; slightly sticky, slightly plastic; many fine roots and many medium roots; few fine prominent strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) masses of oxidized iron in the lower part; 10 percent, by volume greenish glauconite pellets; very strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (5 to 30 cm thick) 

 Btg1--25 to 61 cm (10 to 24 inches), dark greenish gray (5GY 4/1) clay; moderate coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate medium angular blocky structure; firm; very sticky, very plastic; few fine roots; many medium prominent strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) and yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) masses of oxidized iron; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; 45 percent, by volume greenish glauconite pellets; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary. 

 Btg2--61 to 86 cm (24 to 34 inches), dark greenish gray (5GY 4/1) sandy clay; moderate coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate medium angular blocky structure; firm; very sticky, very plastic; many fine roots; many medium prominent strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) and yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) masses of oxidized iron; few weakly cemented brownish ironstone nodules; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; 45 percent, by volume greenish glauconite pellets; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary. (Combined thickness of the Btg or Bt horizon is 46 to 76 cm.) 

 BCg--86 to 127 cm (34 to 50 inches); dark greenish gray (10Y 4/1) clay loam with pockets of sandy clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; sticky, plastic; few medium prominent light olive brown (2.5Y 5/6) masses of oxidized iron; few weakly cemented brownish iron nodules; 45 percent, by volume greenish glauconite pellets; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary. (0 to 46 cm thick) 

 Cg--127 to 203 cm (50 to 80 inches); dark greenish gray (10Y 3/1) and dark olive gray (5Y 3/2) sandy loam with pockets of sandy clay loam; massive; friable; slightly sticky, slightly plastic; 50 percent, by volume greenish glauconite pellets; very strongly acid. 

TYPE LOCATION: Burlington County, New Jersey; about 2.5 miles northwest of Medford on property of English Setter Club, 1,200 feet west of 541 along lane, 400 feet south of lane; USGS Mount Holly, NJ topographic quadrangle, lat. 39 degrees 55 minutes 49 seconds N. and long. 74 degrees 49 minutes 45 seconds W. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Depth to top of Argillic horizon: 18 to 46 cm (7 to 18 inches)
Depth to base of Argillic horizon: 64 to 152 cm (25 to 60 inches)
Depth to Bedrock: Greater than 183 cm (72 inches)
Depth to Seasonal High Water Table: 0 to 30 cm (0 to 12 inches), November to May
Rock Fragments: 0 to 10 percent, by volume throughout; mostly quartzite and less commonly ironstone
Soil Reaction: Extremely acid to strongly acid throughout the profile, unless limed
Content of Glauconite: Weighted average of 0 to 20 percent, by volume glauconite pellets in the A and E horizons and 20 percent or more in the B and C horizons 

RANGE OF INDIVIDUAL HORIZONS:
A, Ap, or Ag horizon:
Color (moist)--hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 2 to 4, chroma of 1 to 4, or hue of 10Y or 5GY, value of 2.5 to 4, chroma of 1 or 2
Texture--fine sandy loam, sandy loam, silt loam or loam
Redoximorphic features (if they occur)--masses of oxidized iron in shades of red, yellow, or brown 

Eg horizon (if it occurs):
Color--hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 4 to 6, chroma of 1 or 2, or hue of 10Y or 5GY, value of 5 to 7, chroma of 1 or 2. (Some pedons have an E horizon with hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 4 to 6, chroma of 3.)
Texture--loamy fine sand, fine sandy loam, sandy loam, or loam
Redoximorphic features(if they occur)--masses of oxidized iron in shades of red, yellow, brown, or olive, and iron depletions in shades of olive or brown. (Gray or grayish brown iron depletions with chroma 2 or less are sometimes present within this layer, but in most pedons they can be difficult to distinguish due to the masking effects of the dark olive and dark greenish parent materials.) 

Btg horizon:
Color--10Y to 5G, value of 2.5 to 4, chroma of 1 or 2 (Some pedons have a Bt horizon with hue of 2.5Y or 5Y, value of 3 to 5, chroma 3 to 6.)
Texture--sandy clay loam, sandy clay, or clay. (Thin subhorizons of sandy clay loam or clay loam occur in some pedons.)
Redoximorphic features(if they occur)--masses of oxidized iron in shades of red, yellow, brown, or olive, and iron depletions in shades of olive or brown. (Gray or grayish brown iron depletions of chroma 2 or less are sometimes present within this layer, but in most pedons they can be difficult to distinguish due to the masking effects of the dark olive and dark greenish parent materials.) 

BCg horizon:
Color--hue of 10Y to 5BG, value of 2.5 to 6, and chroma of 1 or 2. (Some pedons have a BC horizon with hue of 2.5Y or 5Y, value of 3 to 5, chroma 3 to 6.)
Texture--sandy clay, sandy clay loam, loam, or sandy loam and may contain pockets of these textures
Redoximorphic features(if they occur)--masses of oxidized iron in shades of red, yellow, brown, or olive, and iron depletions in shades of olive or brown. (Gray or grayish brown iron depletions of chroma 2 or less are sometimes present within this layer, but in most pedons they can be difficult to distinguish due to the masking effects of the dark olive and dark greenish parent materials.) 

Cg horizon:
Color--hue of 2.5Y or 5Y, value of 3 to 5, chroma 1 or 2, or hue of 10Y to 5G, value of 2.5 to 6, and chroma of 1 or 2. (Some pedon have a C horizon with hue of 2.5Y or 5Y, value of 3 to 5, chroma 3 to 6.)
Texture--sandy loam, sandy clay loam, sandy clay, or clay and may contain pockets of these textures or sandier textures. Thin iron cemented strata or nodules occur in some pedons.
Redoximorphic features (if they occur)--masses of oxidized iron in shades of red, yellow, brown, or olive and iron depletions in shades of olive or brown. (Gray or grayish brown iron depletions of chroma 2 or less are sometimes present within this layer, but in most pedons they can be difficult to distinguish due to the masking effects of the dark olive and greenish parent materials.) 

COMPETING SERIES: None 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landscape: Northern Atlantic Coastal Plain
Landform: Depression, low flat, and drainageway
Geomorphic Component: Dip
Hillslope Profile Position: None
Parent Material: Glauconite bearing fluviomarine deposits
Slope: 0 to 2 percent
Elevation: 7.6 to 49 meters (25 to 160 feet)
Frost Free Period: 180 to 210 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature: 10 to 14 degrees C. (50 to 57 degrees F.)
Mean Annual Precipitation: 1016 to 1219 mm (40 to 48 inches)

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
Adelphia soils--are moderately well drained, are in a fine-loamy family, and average less than 20 percent glauconite pellets in the B horizon; on similar landforms
Collington soils--are well drained, are in a fine-loamy family, and average less than 20 percent glauconite pellets in the B horizon; on higher landforms
Colts Neck soils--are well drained, are in a fine-loamy family, and contain less than 20 percent glauconite pellets in the particle-size control section; on higher landforms
Donlonton soils-have a seasonal high water table at a depth of 46 to 61 cm (18 to 24 inches) (moderately well drained); on slightly higher landforms
Freehold soils--are well drained, are in a fine-loamy family, and contain less than 10 percent glauconite pellets in the particle-size control section; on higher landforms
Marlton soils--are moderately well drained, with similar glauconite content; on slightly higher landforms
Kresson soils--are somewhat poorly drained, with similar glauconite content; on slightly higher landforms 

DRAINAGE AND SATURATED HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY:
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Poorly drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Very shallow (0 to 25 cm) and common (present 3 to 6 months)
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Low or medium
Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity Class: Moderately high or moderately low
Permeability Class (obsolete): Moderately slow or slow
Shrink-Swell Potential: Moderate 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA
Major Uses: Most areas have been cleared and used for crop production. The most common are hay, pasture, turf, corn, and soybeans.
Vegetation: Wooded areas are dominantly sweetgum, red maple, white oak, American holly, and yellow-poplar. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Distribution: The Northern Atlantic Coastal Plain of Maryland and New Jersey
Extent: Small 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Burlington County, New Jersey 1943 

REMARKS:
07/2000. Revised from Ochraquults to Albaquults. The classification of these soils as "aquults" is based on evidence of wetness other than low chroma. Low chroma mottles and gray matrix colors which are normal in other poorly drained soils are rare in these soils. For this reason the depth to, extent, and distinctness of redoximorphic features (mainly masses of oxidized iron and nodules), landscape position, and hydrologic indicators, have been used so as to group these soils with soils of similar drainage. 

02/2002. This pedon description was revised in order to more clearly reflect typical colors, glauconite content, and other horizonation features found in this series. Revisions were also made to the range in characteristics needed for MLRA update projects in NJ, MD, and DE. MLRA survey update observations and review of previously published soil survey data on these soils indicates that in some mapped areas Colemantown soils have umbric epipedons. However, because the majority of these soils exhibit an abrupt textural change between the umbric epipedon and the argillic horizon, within a short vertical distance (7.5 cm), they do not meet the criteria for classification of "Umbraquults". Colemantown soils with umbric epipedons do not differ significantly in use and management from those with ochric epipedons. 

Diagnostic horizons and other soil characteristics recognized in this pedon are:
Ochric epipedon--the zone from the soil surface to a depth of 25 cm (Ap horizon)
Argillic horizon--the zone from 25 to 86 cm (Bt1 and Bt2 horizons)
Aquic conditions--the soil has periodic saturation and reduction within 0 to 30 cm of the soil surface, and one or more unsaturated layers within 200 cm of the surface, occurring below the periodically saturated zone (episaturation)
Abrupt textural change: A significant increase in clay content in the fine-earth fraction within a vertical distance of 7.5 cm or less from the base of the ochric epipedon and the upper part of the argillic horizon (the zone between 25 and 32.5 cm) 

Other soil features identified with this pedon:
High glauconite content feature--weighted average of 20 percent or more glauconite pellets, by weight in the fine-earth fraction within the Bt mineralogy control section (25 to 75 cm zone) 

ADDITIONAL DATA: Pedon 92NJ-033-007. Analysis completed by Soil Survey Laboratory, Lincoln, NE. 
Database Information:
OSD Data Mapunit ID: To be developed
Typical Pedon Data Mapunit ID: 99273
OSD User Pedon ID: To be developed 

Previous revisions: 11/2002 Rev. JAK

The 12/2007 revision adds silt loam texture to the range in characteristics for the A horizon, updates the format, adds saturated hydraulic conductivity class, and introduces metric units.


National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
