LOCATION COMBS                  KY+IN MD TN VA WV

Established Series
Rev. RAH:WHC
05/2009

COMBS SERIES

The Combs series consists of deep, well drained, soils on flood plains and low stream terraces, formed in loamy alluvium washed chiefly from soils formed in residuum of weathered sandstone, siltstone, and shale.  Permeability is moderate or moderately rapid.  Slopes range from 0 to 4 percent.  The average annual temperature is about 55 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation is about 48 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, active, mesic Fluventic Hapludolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Combs fine sandy loam--on a smooth 2 percent slope under corn stubble and weeds.  (Colors are for moist soil.)

     Ap--0 to 8 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) fine sandy loam, moderate medium subangular blocky structure parting to moderate fine granular; very friable; common fine roots and pores; few wormcasts; 2 percent red sandstone fragments 2 to 5 cm across; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 12 inches thick)

    A--8 to 23 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure parting to moderate fine granular; very friable; common fine roots; common fine pores; few wormcasts; 4 percent red sandstone fragments 2 to 5 cm across; medium acid; clear smooth boundary.  (0 to 18 inches thick)

    Bw1--23 to 44 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) fine sandy loam; moderate coarse prismatic structure parting to weak medium subangular blocky; friable; few fine roots; common fine pores; nearly continuous coatings or flows on prisms and most pores; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

    Bw2--44 to 64 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) loam; weak coarse prismatic structure parting to weak medium subangular blocky; friable; few fine roots; common fine pores; nearly continuous thin coatings or flows or prisms and in most pores; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.

    Bw3--64 to 80 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) loam; moderate very coarse prismatic structure parting to weak medium subangular blocky; common fine pores; continuous coatings or flows on prisms and in most pores; slightly acid. (Combined thickness of the Bw horizon is 16 to 50 inches or more)

TYPE LOCATION:  Perry County, Kentucky; near mouth of Oldhouse Branch on North Fork of Kentucky River, about 1.3 miles south of Chavies.  (Krypton Topo Quad x 2,696,900' x 373,000')

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness is more than 40 inches.  Thickness of the mollic epipedon ranges from 10 to 24 inches.  The soil ranges from medium acid to neutral throughout.  Coarse fragments are commonly lacking but range up to 15 percent.

The Ap or A horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 3, and chroma of 2 or 3. It is silt loam, sandy loam, loam, or fine sandy loam.

The Bw horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 6.  It is loam, silt loam, sandy loam, or fine sandy loam.  Some pedons have sandy clay loam below a depth of 40 inches.

Some pedons have a BC horizon with color and texture ranges like that of the Bw horizon.

The C horizon, where present, has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 6.  Mottles are in shades of brown or gray.  It is loam, silt loam, sandy loam, or sandy clay loam.  Some pedons are stratified.

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Landes series.  Landes soils have sola less than 40 inches thick and free carbonates in the C horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Combs soils are on low stream terraces and flood plains.  Slope gradients commonly range from 0 to 4 percent.  These soils formed in alluvium washed chiefly from soils of weathered sandstone, siltstone, and shale origin and in places limestone.  Average annual air temperature ranges from 53 degrees to 59 degrees F., and average annual precipitation ranges from 40 to 50 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Bessener (proposed) Cutshin, Gilpin, Grigsby, Rowdy,  Shelocta and Speedwell (proposed) series.  Bessemer and Speedwell soils are fine-loamy.  Cutshin soils have more than 15 percent coarse fragments, and are on nearby steep mountain sides.  Grigsby soils  lack mollic epipedons.  Rowdy soils lack mollic epipedons and are on similar landscapes along smaller streams.  Gilpin and Shelocta soils have argillic horizons and are on nearby steep mountain sides.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is slow or medium and permeability is moderate or moderately rapid.  Most areas flood.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Nearly all areas are cleared and used for growing cultivated crops and pasture.  Crops include corn, small grains, burley tobacco, hay, and garden or truck crops.  Native vegetation was a mixed hardwood forest interspaced with cane breaks.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Cumberland-Allegheny Plateau the Northern and Southern Appalachian Ridges and Valleys, and the Blue Ridge in Kentucky, Virginia, and possibly West Virginia.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Perry County, Kentucky; 1979.

REMARKS:

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - 0 to 23 inches (Ap & A horizons)

Cambic horizon - 23 to 80 inches (Bw horizons)

ADDITIONAL DATA: Characterization sample S77KY-193-6 (Typical Pedon).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
