LOCATION CONSUMO                PR

Established Series
Rev. GRB
09/2006

CONSUMO SERIES

The Consumo series consists of very deep, moderately well drained, moderately permeable soils on summits and side slopes of mountains.  They formed in residuum that weathered from basic volcanic rocks.  Near the type location, the mean annual precipitation is about 76 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 77 degrees F.  Slopes range from 20 to 60 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Fine, mixed, semiactive, isohyperthermic Typic Haplohumults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Consumo clay--Pangolagrass. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 6 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) clay; moderate medium granular structure; slightly hard friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; many fine roots; very strongly acid, clear smooth boundary. (4 to 8 inches thick)

     Bt1--6 to 14 inches; red (2.5YR 4/8) clay; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; common fine roots; common fine pores and root channels; few faint clay films on ped faces; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to 8 inches thick)

     Bt2--14 to 20 inches; red (2.5YR 4/8) rubbed color clay; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; nonsticky, slightly plastic; few fine roots; few faint clay films on ped faces; about 50 percent, by volume, saprolite; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (4 to 8 inches)

     C--20 to 60 inches; 25 percent red (2.5YR 4/8), 25 percent yellow (10YR 7/8), 25 percent brown (7.5YR 5/4), and 25 percent light gray (10YR 7/1) variegated saprolite having a silty clay loam texture; massive; black (10YR 2/1) coatings on some faces; very friable; nonsticky, slightly plastic; original rock structure is visible and weathered rock fragments can be easily broken between fingers; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Oeste SCD, Puerto Rico; 8 miles east of the city of Mayaguez; 100 feet west and 50 feet south of kilometer marker 13.5 on Highway 106.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the solum ranges from 14 to 24 inches.  Thickness of the argillic horizon varies from 10 to 16 inches.  Reaction ranges from very strongly acid to slightly acid throughout.  

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 2.5YR to 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 6.  Texture is sandy clay loam, clay loam or clay.

The upper part Bt horizon has hue of 2.5YR or 5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 6 or 8.  Texture is clay.

The lower part of the Bt horizon has hue of 2.5YR or 5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 6 or 8.  Content of saprolite ranges from 10 to 60 percent, by volume.   Texture is clay or silty clay.


The BC horizon, where present, has the same range of colors as the Bt horizon.  Content of saprolite ranges from 40 to 80 percent, by volume.  Texture is silty clay loam, silty clay or clay.

The C horizon is composed of saprolite having no dominant color and is multicolored in shades of red, yellow, brown and gray.  Texture is loam, silty clay loam or clay loam.

COMPETING SERIES:  The Daguao, Mariana and Naranjito soils are in the same family.  All of these soils are on similar positions as Consumo soils but are moderately deep to bedrock.  

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Consumo soils are on summits and side slopes of mountains.  Slopes range from 20 to 60 percent.  They formed in fine over coarser textured residuum weathered from basic volcanic rock.  The climate is humid tropical.  The average annual precipitation ranges from 73 to 80 inches and the mean annual temperature ranges from 75 to 78 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Anones, Daguey, Humatas, Morado, and Mucara series.  All of these soils are on similar positions.  Anones and Morado soils are moderately deep and have less developed subsoils.  Daguey soils have more clay in the control section and are Oxisols.  Humatas soils have more clay in the control section.  Mucara soils have less clay in the control section and have less developed subsoils.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of Consumo soils are used for coffee, pasture and food crops.  The vegetation consists of native and introduced grasses, shrubs, and trees.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Humid uplands of Puerto Rico.  The series is of large extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Raleigh, North Carolina.

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Ponce Survey Area, Puerto Rico; 1971.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:

Ochric epipedon - the zone from 0 to 6 inches (Ap horizon).

Argillic horizon - the zone from 6 to 20 inches (Bt1 and Bt2 horizons).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
