LOCATION CUNDIYO                NM

Established Series
RD:  JW/BDS/RJA
02/1999

CUNDIYO SERIES

The Cundiyo series consists of deep, well and somewhat excessively drained soils derived from granite on steep mountains.  Slopes are 30 to 80 percent.  The average annual precipitation is 26 inches, and the average annual temperature is about 4l degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive Ustic Haplocryalfs

TYPIFYING PEDON:  Cundiyo very cobbly loam - forest
                  (Colors are for dry soils unless otherwise noted.)

    Oi--l to 0 inch; Needles, leaves, and twigs in various stages of decomposition.  (l to 2 inches thick)

    El--0 to 6 inches; Pale brown (l0YR 6/3) very cobbly loam, dark grayish brown (l0YR 4/2) moist; moderate very fine and fine granular structure; very friable; common fine and few medium roots; common very fine pores; neutral; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to l0 inches thick)

    E2--6 to l4 inches; Pale brown (l0YR 6/3) very cobbly sandy loam, dark grayish brown (l0YR 4/2) moist; weak very fine granular structure; very friable; many very fine and few medium roots; many very fine pores; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to l2 inches thick)

    Btl--l4 to 34 inches; Very pale brown (l0YR 7/3) very cobbly loam, dark brown (l0YR 4/3) moist; weak very fine granular structure; friable; common very fine and fine roots; many very fine and fine pores; few thin clay films on rock fragments and between sand grains; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (l0 to 20 inches thick)

    Bt2--34 to 46 inches; Light yellowish brown (l0YR 6/4) very cobbly loam, yellowish brown (l0YR 5/4) moist; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly plastic; few very fine and fine roots; common very fine and fine pores; few thin clay films on rock fragments and between sand grains; slightly acid; gradual smooth boundary. (l0 to 20 inches thick)

    C--46 to 60 inches; Light yellowish brown (l0YR 6/4) very cobbly loamy sand, yellowish brown (l0YR 5/4) moist; massive; friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; few very fine and fine roots; common very fine and fine pores; slightly acid.  (l0 to 40 inches thick)

TYPE LOCATION:  Santa Fe County, New Mexico; SWl/4SWl/4 sec. l8, T.  l8N., R. llE.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil Moisture:  Moist in the soil moisture control section for 60 consecutive days or more within a 3-month period following the summer solstice.

Soil Temperature:  37 to 45 degrees F. with summer temperature less than 47 degrees F.

Rock Fragments:  35 to 90 percent, mostly pebbles and cobbles

Reaction:  Slightly acid through neutral

A horizon (when present) - Value:  5 or 6 dry, 4 or 5 moist Chroma:  2 or 3 Texture:  Coarse sandy loam to loam

E horizon - Value:  5 through 7 dry, 3 through 5 moist Chroma: 2 or 3 Texture:  Coarse sandy loam to loam

Bt horizon - Hue:  7.5YR or l0YR Value:  6 or 7 dry and 4 or 5 moist Chroma:  2 through 4 Texture:  Coarse sandy loam to loam with 3 percent more clay than the E horizon. Clay content:  5 to l5 percent

C horizon (when present) - Hue:  7.5YR or l0YR Value:  6 or 7 dry, 4 or 5 moist Chroma:  4 or 5

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Agneston, Angostura, Cloud Peak, Duchesne, Frisco, Gambler, Granile, Guffy, Hyattville, Kebler, Lake Creek, Lakehelen, Larand, Leadville, Lulude, Macfarlane, Presa, Redondo, Tenrag, Tigeron, Tolvar, Trebor, and Worock.  Agneston, Cloud Peak, Guffy, Hyattville, Kebler, Lake Creek, Lakehelen, Lulude, and Tenrag soils are less than 40 inches to a lithic or paralithic contact.  Angostura, Frisco, Gambler, Granile, Larand, Presa, Tolvar, Trebor, and Worock soils have more than l5 percent clay in the particle-size control section.  Duchesne soils have an argillic horizon less than 20 inches thick.  Leadville soils have hues of 5YR or redder in the Bt horizon.  Redondo soils have tuff rock fragments. Tigeron soils are moist in the spring and early summer.  Macfarlane have mostly stones in the control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Cundiyo soils are on steep and very steep ridges and side slopes of mountains at elevations of 8,200 to ll,000 feet.  The climate is continental; summers are cool and the winters are cold.  Annual temperature is estimated at 4l degrees F.  Annual precipitation is estimated at 26 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Bobtail, Mirabal, and Nambe soils.  Bobtail, Mirabal, and Nambe soils lack argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well and somewhat excessively drained; very rapid runoff;  moderately rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly for forest, grazing, and wildlife.  Native vegetation is aspen, Douglas-fir, white fir, rose, and strawberry.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Mountainous areas of north-central New Mexico.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Bozeman, Montana

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Santa Fe County (Santa Fe Area), New Mexico, l970.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic Horizons and Features Recognized in this Pedon are:

Argillic horizon:  The zone from l4 to 46 inches.  (Bt horizons)



National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.


