LOCATION WABANICA               MN

Established Series
Rev. TAG-TWN-AGG
3/98

WABANICA SERIES

The Wabanica series consists of very deep, poorly and very poorly drained, moderately permeable soils on glacial lake plains.  They formed in silty calcareous glacial lacustrine sediments.  Slope are 0 to 2 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 24 inches, and mean annual temperature is about 38 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, superactive, calcareous, frigid Typic Endoaquolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Wabanica silt loam - on a slightly concave slope of less than 1 percent in a cultivated field.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

   Ap--0 to 8 inches; black (10YR 2/1) silt loam, very dark gray (10YR 3/1) dry; moderate medium and fine granular structure; friable; slightly effervescent; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (7 to 11 inches thick)

   Bg--8 to 11 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) silt loam; common fine prominent yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) Fe concentrations; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; slightly effervescent; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (3 to 14 inches thick)

   Cg1--11 to 28 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam; many fine distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) Fe concentrations; massive; friable; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.

   Cg2--28 to 39 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam; many medium and fine distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) Fe concentrations and common fine faint light gray (10YR 7/1) Fe depletions; massive; friable; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.

   Cg3--39 to 60 inches; light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) silty clay loam; many medium and fine distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) Fe concentrations and common fine faint light gray (10YR 7/1) Fe depletions; massive; friable; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Lake of the Woods County, Minnesota; about 8 miles north and 2 miles east of Williams; 100 feet east and 150 feet north of the southwest corner, section 4, T. 162 N., R. 33 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The thickness of solum ranges from 10 to 24 inches.  The thickness of the mollic epipedon ranges from 7 to 14 inches.  These soils typically have free carbonates throughout, but in some pedons the upper 5 to 10 inches is leached.  These soils have less than 3 percent rock fragments in the solum and C horizon.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 (less than 5.5 dry) and chroma of 1 or 2.  It is silt loam, silty clay loam, loam, clay loam or their mucky analogues.  It is neutral or slightly alkaline.

The Bg horizon has hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 1 or 2.  The range of textures is the same as that for the A horizon.  It is slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline.

The Cg horizon has hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 1 or 2.  It is silt loam or silty clay loam or is stratified.  Some pedons have thin strata of clayey material.  It is slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no competing series.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  These soils are on glacial lake plains.  Slopes are linear or slightly concave and range from 0 to 2 percent.  These soils formed in calcareous silty lacustrine sediments.  These materials are Late Wisconsinan in age.  The mean annual air temperature is 36 to 43 degrees F.  The mean annual precipitation is 20 to 26 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are Clearwater, Sago, and Zippel soils.  Clearwater soils are on similar positions, but formed in clayey lacustrine sediments.  The very poorly drained Sago soils are in depressions and have a histic epipedon.  The Zippel soils occupy similar positions.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained and very poorly drained.  Runoff is slow.  Permeability is moderate.
The poorly drained phase has a seasonal high water table at depths of .5 to 1.5 feet November to June in most years.  The very poorly drained phase has a seasonal high water table at +.5 to 1.0 feet from November to June in most years.

USE AND VEGETATION:  These soils are cropped to small grain, alfalfa, potatoes, and bluegrass seed.  Native vegetation is tall grass prairie interspersed with aspen.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northwestern and northcentral Minnesota, primarily the Glacial Lake Agassiz plain.  This soil is moderately extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: St. Paul, Minnesota

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Lake of the Woods County, Minnesota, 1989.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized are:  mollic epipedon - zone from surface to 8 inches (Ap horizon); cambic horizon - the zone from 8 to 11 inches (Bg horizon); aquic moisture regime.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
