LOCATION WALDPORT               OR

Established Series
Rev. WRP/TDT/RWL
11/2004

WALDPORT SERIES

The Waldport series consists of very deep, excessively drained soils formed in mixed eolian sand. They are on stabilized dunes and have slopes of 0 to 70 percent. The mean annual precipitation is 80 inches and the mean annual temperature is 51 degrees F. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Mixed, isomesic Typic Udipsamments 

TYPICAL PEDON: Waldport fine sand, forested, steep east-facing slope. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.) 

	Oi1--0 to 1 inch; undecomposed litter of leaves, needles, and twigs. 

	Oi2--1 to 3 inches; decomposed and partially decomposed leaves, needles, and twigs. 

	A1--3 to 5 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) fine sand, gray (10YR 5/1) dry; weak very fine granular structure; loose, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; many fine and common medium roots; many irregular pores; strongly acid (pH 5.4); clear smooth boundary. 

	A2--5 to 8 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) fine sand, gray (10YR 6/1) dry; single grain; loose, nonsticky and nonplastic; many fine and common medium roots; many irregular pores; few black and reddish brown stains; strongly acid (pH 5.4); clear smooth boundary. (combined A horizon is 3 to 10 inches thick) 

	AC--8 to 23 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) fine sand, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) dry; single grain; loose, nonsticky and nonplastic; common fine and few medium roots; many irregular pores; few thin black stains in bands and few reddish brown and yellow stains along root channels; moderately acid (pH 5.8); diffuse smooth boundary. (0 to 20 inches thick) 

	C--23 to 63 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) fine sand, light gray (10YR 7/2) dry; single grain; loose, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine and medium roots; many irregular pores; slightly acid (pH 6.2). 

TYPE LOCATION: Lane County, Oregon; near the entrance to Honeyman State Park campgrounds in the NW1/4 NE1/4 of section 15, T. 19 S., R. 12 W. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Thickness of the solum is 5 to 20 inches. The mean annual soil temperature is 49 to 55 degrees F. The difference between the mean summer and mean winter temperature varies from 5 to 9 degrees F. 

The A horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 2 through 4 moist, 5 or 6 dry, and chroma of 1 or 2 moist and dry. Texture is fine sand or loamy fine sand. Reaction is very strongly acid through moderately acid. Some pedons contain a few weakly cemented yellowish brown to brown nodules. 

The AC horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, value of 3 through 5 moist, 4 through 6 dry, and chroma of 2 through 4 moist and dry. 

The C horizon has hue of 10YR, 2.5Y, or 5Y, value of 3 through 6 moist, 4 through 7 dry, and chroma of 3 or 4 moist and 1 through 4 dry. Reaction is very strongly acid through slightly acid. 

COMPETING SERIES: This is the Frankport and Westport series. Frankport soils have more than 75 percent medium and coarse sand, a moist value of 1 or 2 throughout, and are weathered from heavy minerals such as chromite, ilmenite, and magnetite. Westport soils cannot be adequately separated and should be evaluated during an MLRA 4A update project.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Waldport soils are on recently stabilized sand dunes with undulating to hilly topography at elevations of 0 to 500 feet and slopes up to 70 percent on the leeward side. The soils formed in eolian sand of mixed mineralogy. The climate is maritime with cool moist summers and cool wet winters. The mean annual precipitation ranges from 60 to 100 inches. The mean January temperature is 43 degrees F. and the mean July temperature is 60 degrees F.  The mean annual temperature is 48 to 54 degrees F. The frost-free season is 180 to 300 days. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Bandon, Bullards, Ferrelo, Gearhart, Heceta, Netarts, Warrenton, and Yaquina soils. Bandon, Bullards, Netarts, and Yaquina soils have a spodic horizon. In addition, Yaquina soils are somewhat poorly drained. Ferrelo and Gearhart soils have an umbric epipedon more than 10 inches thick and have a cambic horizon. Heceta and Warrenton soils are poorly drained. The Bandon, Bullards, Ferrelo, and Netarts soils are on marine terraces.  Gearhart and Heceta soils are on stabilized dunes.  Warrenton soils are on long, narrow interdunal areas.  Yaquina soils are on marine terraces and low interdunes.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Excessively drained; slow runoff; very rapid permeability. 

USE AND VEGETATION: These soils are used for homesites, recreation sites, wildlife habitat, watershed, and limited pasture and woodland in the more sheltered areas. Native vegetation includes shorepine, Sitka spruce, salal, huckleberry, wax myrtle, and rhododendron with western hemlock and Douglas-fir in more sheltered areas; and beachgrass, American dunegrass, coyotebrush, lupine, mountain brome, and Scotch broom in more exposed or recently stabilized areas. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Fog influenced coastal areas of Oregon; MLRA 4A. The series is moderately extensive. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Lane County Area, Oregon, 1981. 

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon include: 
Umbric colors - from 0 to 2 inches (A1 horizon). 
Particle-size control section - from 3 to 43 inches

Correlation note 10/04:  The Westport series, when initially set up along the coast of Washington, was considered as having a mesic soil temperature regime.  This fog influenced zone in Washington was later correlated into an isomesic soil temperature regime.

ADDITIONAL DATA: Reference sample with partial data from pedon 88P145, sample 88P795 near the series type location in Lane County, Oregon sampled by NSSL at Lincoln, NE, 6/88. 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
