LOCATION WAMPSVILLE             NY

Established Series
Rev. MGC-LWK-PSP
03/2005

WAMPSVILLE SERIES

The Wampsville series consists of very deep, well drained soils on glacial outwash alluvial fans and glaciofluvial deposits of terraces, valley trains, and kames. They are nearly level to very steep soils formed in materials in which reddish shale is a significant component, with limestone, sandstone, and some grayish shale. Slope ranges from 0 to 25 percent. Mean annual temperature is 48 degrees F. and mean annual precipitation is 38 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, mesic Glossic Hapludalfs

TYPICAL PEDON: Wampsville gravely silt loam - hay. (Colors refer to moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

   Ap -- 0 to 8 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/2) gravelly silt loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; 15 percent rock fragments; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (6 to 10 inches.)

   E -- 8 to 12 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/3) gravelly loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; common fine roots; common medium and large pores; 15 percent rock fragments; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary. (0 to 8 inches thick.)

   Bt/E -- 12 to 16 inches 12 to 24 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) gravelly clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and medium pores with clay linings on surfaces along pores; reddish brown (5YR 5/3), pinkish gray (7.5YR 7/2) dry, coatings 2 to 4 millimeters thick that constitutes less than 15 percent of the layer; clay films on all faces of peds; 20 percent  rock fragments; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary. (2 to 8 inches thick.) 

   Bt1 -- 16 to 24 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) gravelly clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and medium pores with clay linings on surfaces along the pores; clay films on faces of all peds; 20 percent rock fragments; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

   Bt2 -- 24 to 32 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) gravelly clay loam; moderate coarse subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; common fine pores; distinct clay films on all faces of peds and on surfaces along pores; 25 percent rock fragments; slightly acid; gradual wavy boundary. (Combined thickness of the Bt horizon is 12 to 27 inches.) 

   BC -- 32 to 36 inches; dark reddish gray (5YR 4/2) gravelly loam; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine pores; patchy clay coats on faces of peds; 30 percent rock fragments; neutral; clear wavy boundary. (0 to 18 inches thick.)

   C1 -- 36 to 45 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/2) very gravelly loam; massive; friable; numerous reddish and greenish gray shale chips; 35 percent rock fragments; moderately alkaline; slightly effervescent; abrupt irregular boundary. (4 to 30 inches thick.)

   2C2 -- 45 to 72 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/2) stratified sand and gravel; numerous reddish and greenish-gray shale fragments; moderately alkaline; slightly effervescent.

TYPE LOCATION: Madison County, New York; gravel pit 1/2 mile east of Village of Wampsville. USGS Oneida, NY topographic quadrangle; Latitude 43 degrees, 04 minutes, 16 seconds N. and Longitude 75 degrees, 42 minutes, 16 seconds W. NAD 1927.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness ranges from 24 to 40 inches. Depth to carbonates ranges from 20 to 48 inches. Coarse fragments, dominantly limestone and sandstone gravel and cobblestones and reddish and greenish-gray shale fragments, range from 10 to 35 percent by volume in the solum and from 25 to 70 percent in the substratum.

The Ap horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 2or 3. They are loam or silt loam in the fine earth fraction. They range from strongly acid through neutral.

The E horizon, where present, has hue of 5YR through 2.5Y, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 2 through 4. They are loam or silt loam in the fine earth fraction. It has weak or moderate, fine or medium granular or subangular blocky structure. Consistence is friable. They range from strongly acid through neutral. 

The Bt/E horizon has colors and textures similar to the Bt and E horizons. It has weak or moderate, medium or coarse subangular blocky structure and friable or firm consistence. They range from strongly acid through neutral. 

The Bt horizon has hue of 2.5YR through 7.5YR, value of 3 through 5, chroma of 2 through 4. It is clay loam or sandy clay loam in the fine earth. It has weak or moderate, medium or coarse subangular blocky structure and friable or firm consistence. It ranges from moderately acid through moderately alkaline, with pH increasing with depth.

The BC horizon is similar in color to the Bt horizon. The BC horizon is loam or silt loam in the fine earth fraction. It has weak medium or coarse subangular blocky structure and friable or firm consistence. Reaction ranges from slightly acid through moderately alkaline, and free carbonates may be present.

The C horizons are variable in color, ranging in hue from 2.5YR through 2.5Y, depending on stratification and lithochromic effects of the shale. Reaction ranges from slightly acid through moderately alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES: The Fairport, Honeoye, Lansing, Ontario, Wassaic, and Yuneyeti series are members of the same family. All of these soils lack the sorted and stratified materials in the lower part of the series control section of the Wampsville soils.

The Belmore, Chili, Conotton, Howard, Kars, and Palmyra series are members of other families. Belmore and Chili soils lack interfingering of albic material into the argillic horizon. Conotton, Howard, and Kars soils have loamy-skeletal textural control sections. Palmyra soils have contrasting family textures.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Wampsville soils occupy alluvial fans and glaciofluvial deposits of terraces, valley trains, and kames. They developed in materials in which reddish shale is a significant component, with limestone, sandstone, and some grayish shale. Slope ranges from 0 to 25 percent in gradient. Mean annual air temperature ranges from 47 to 50 degrees F. Mean annual precipitation is 30 to 45 inches. Mean annual growing season is 135 to 180 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: Cazenovia and Ovid soils occupy associated areas of reddish till. Honeoye and Ontario soils are in till less red in hue in the same region. The Phelps series is a catenary associate.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained. Internal drainage is medium or rapid. The potential for surface runoff is low to medium. Permeability is moderate in the solum and rapid in the substratum.

USE AND VEGETATION: Most areas have been cleared and are used for corn, small grains, hay, pasture, or urban uses. Woodlots contain sugar maple, red oak, and associated northern hardwoods.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Western and Central New York. MLRA 101. The series is not extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Madison County, New York, 1954.

REMARKS: Wampsville soils were classified as Gray Brown Podzolic soils in the modified 1938 system. The upper 4 inches of the B21t horizon was subdivided into the Bt/E horizon.

Diagnostic horizons and other features recognized in the typical pedon are as follows:
(1) Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to 8 inches (Ap horizon).
(2) Argillic horizon - the zone from 12 to 32 inches (Bt/E and Bt horizons).
(3) Glossic subgroup - as evidenced by interfingering of Albic material around peds in the upper part of the Argillic horizon (Bt/E horizon). 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
