LOCATION WANDA                  MO 

Established Series
Rev. DMM-MWA-RLT
07/2004

WANDA SERIES 

The Wanda series consists of very deep, well drained soils formed in a thin mantle of loess or other silty material mixed with colluvium from cherty limestone or tripoli.  These soils are on uplands and terraces.  Slopes range from 1 to 5 percent. Mean annual temperature is about 56 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is about 41 inches. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, mesic Typic Paleudolls 

TYPICAL PEDON:  Wanda silt loam - on a 3 percent convex slope in pasture at an elevation of 1205.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.) 

   Ap--0 to 10 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silt loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; moderate fine and very fine granular structure; very friable; many fine roots; about 5 percent subrounded chert gravel; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 10 inches thick) 

   Bt1--10 to 16 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/2 and 3/3) silty clay loam, reddish gray (5YR 5/2) and reddish brown (5YR 5/3) dry; weak fine and very fine subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine roots; few faint clay films on faces of peds; 10 percent subrounded chert gravel; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (4 to 10 inches thick) 

   Bt2--16 to 22 inches; dark reddish brown (2.5YR 3/4) gravelly silty clay loam; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; few faint clay films on faces of peds; 15 percent subrounded chert gravel; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary. 

   Bt3--22 to 36 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) gravelly silty clay loam; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common very fine roots; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; common fine dark manganese concretions; 20 percent subrounded chert gravel; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary. 

   Bt4--36 to 48 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) gravelly silty clay loam; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; few very fine roots; common distinct clay films on faces of peds; common medium dark manganese concretions; 30 percent subrounded chert gravel; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary. 

   Bt5--48 to 60 inches; red (2.5YR 4/6) very gravelly silty clay; moderate fine and medium angular blocky structure; firm; few very fine roots; common faint clay films on faces of peds; common fine and medium dark manganese concretions; 35 percent subrounded chert gravel; moderately acid. 

TYPE LOCATION:  Newton County, Missouri; 0.25 mile east of Stark City, Missouri; 920 feet south and 2,600 feet west of the northeast corner of sec. 26, T. 25 N., R. 30 W; Stella USGS quadrangle. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The solum thickness and depth to bedrock is more than 60 inches.  The mollic epipedon is 10 to 18 inches thick and usually includes the upper part of the argillic horizon. Reaction ranges from moderately acid to neutral in the A and upper Bt horizon and from strongly acid to slightly acid below. The particle size control section averages 5 to 35 percent coarse fragments, and 27 to 35 percent clay.

The Ap or A horizon has hue of 10YR, 7.5YR, or 5YR; value of 2 or 3, 4 or 5 dry, and chroma of 2 or 3.  It is silt loam or loam. 

Some pedons have a BA horizon that is part of the mollic epipedon.

The Bt horizon has hue of 2.5YR to 10YR; value of 2 or 3, 4 or 5 dry when part of the mollic epipedon; and chroma of 2 or 3.  It is silty clay loam, clay loam, or their gravelly to extremely gravelly analogs.  

The Bt below the mollic epipedon, 2Bt, and 3Bt horizons have hue of 7.5YR to 10R, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 3 to 6.  It is silty clay loam or gravelly silty clay loam in the upper part, and gravelly silty clay loam or gravelly silty clay or their very gravelly analogues in the lower part. 

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other series in the family.  Series in other families are Eldorado, Newtonia, Olpe, and Riverton. Eldorado soils are loamy-skeletal, Newtonia soils are fine-silty, Olpe soils are clayey-skeletal, and Riverton soils are loamy-skeletal and have a lower base saturation. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Wanda soils are on gently sloping uplands and stream terraces.  Slopes range from 1 to 5 percent.  These soils formed in a thin mantle of loess or other silty material mixed with colluvium from cherty limestone or tripoli.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 55 to 57 degrees F, and the mean annual precipitation ranges from 39 to 43 inches. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Creldon, Eldorado, Hoberg, Keeno, and Newtonia series.  Creldon and Hoberg soils have fragipans and are on similar upland positions.  Eldorado and Keeno soils are loamy-skeletal and are on similar or more sloping positions. Newtonia soils are in upland basins or similar positions. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is low. Permeability is moderate. The saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderately high.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mainly used for pasture, hayland, and small grains.  The native vegetation is tall prairie grasses. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The Ozark Border area (MLRA 116B) of southwest Missouri and a small acreage in MLRA 112.  The series is of small extent. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE:  Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Newton County, Missouri, l984. 

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface to a depth of 16 inches (Ap and Bt1 horizons)
Argillic horizon - the zone from 10 to more than 60 inches (Bt horizons)
Pale feature - the amount of clay in the argillic does not decrease within 60 inches.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
