LOCATION WESTVIEW               OK+KS

Established Series
Rev. CRC:GFS:JGF
02/2003

WESTVIEW SERIES

The Westview series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately slowly permeable soils on terraces that formed in calcareous silty sediments of Pleistocene age.  These soils are on nearly level low terraces above flood plains in the Central Rolling Red Plains.  Slopes are 0 to 1 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is 23 inches.  Mean annual temperature is 61 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, superactive, thermic Pachic Argiustolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Westview silty clay loam, cultivated to wheat.  (Colors are for dry soils unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 6 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/3) silty clay loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) moist; moderate fine blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; neutral; abrupt smooth boundary.  (6 to 17 inches thick)

     Bt1--6 to 15 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/3) silty clay loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) moist; moderate medium prismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; hard, firm; few fine roots; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 19 inches thick)

     Bt2--15 to 22 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/3) silty clay loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) moist; moderate mediumprismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; hard, firm; few fine roots; thin nearly continuous clay films on faces of peds; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 24 inches thick)

     Bt3--22 to 36 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) silty clay loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/4) moist; weak medium prismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; hard, firm; few fine roots; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; few fine calcium carbonate concretions; few threads of calcium carbonates; calcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.  (0 to 17 inches thick)

     BC--36 to 50 inches; light reddish brown (5YR 6/4) silty clay loam, reddish brown (5YR 5/4) moist; weak medium subangular blocky; hard, firm; few fine roots; calcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.  (9 to 24 inches thick)

     C--50 to 80 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) silty clay loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/4) moist; massive; hard, firm; calcareous; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Harmon County, Oklahoma; about 2 miles west and 1/4 mile south of Hollis; 1,820 feet south and 2,260 feet west of the northeast corner of sec. 5, T. 2 N., R. 26 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 50 to 70 inches.  Depth to soft powdery secondary lime is 19 to 30 inches.  The mollic epipedon is 20 to 45 inches thick.

The Ap or A1 horizon has hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Texture is silty clay loam, silt loam, or loam.  Reaction ranges from neutral to moderately alkaline.

Some pedons have BA horizons from 4 to 6 inches thick that have colors, textures, and reaction like the A1 horizon.

The Bt1 has hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Texture is silty clay loam or clay loam.  Reaction is slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline.  Some pedons are calcareous.

The Bt2 and Bt3 horizons have hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 2 to 4.  Texture is silty clay loam or clay loam.  Reaction is moderately alkaline.  Some pedons are calcareous in the Bt2 horizon and the Bt3 horizon is calcareous.

The BC horizon has hue of 5YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 4 to 6.  Texture is silt loam, loam, silty clay loam, or clay loam.  Reaction is moderately alkaline and calcareous.

The C horizon has color, texture, and reaction like the BC horizon.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Corbin, Pond Creek, and St. Paul series in the same family.  Soils in similar families are the Abilene, Altus, Blanket, Brewer, Carey, Cuero, Dale, Dodson, Farnum, McLain, Mingo, Smithville, Texroy, Tipton, and Wolco series.  Abilene, Blanket, Brewer, Dodson, McLain, Mingo, and Wolco soils have fine control sections.  Altus, Cuero, Farnum, Smithville, Texroy, and Tipton soils have fine-loamy control sections.  Corbin, Pond Creek, and St. Paul soils have soft powdery lime at depths greater than 30 inches.  In addition, Corbin and Pond Creek soils are in more moist climate.  Carey soils have mollic epipedons less than 20 inches thick.  Dale soils lack Bt horizons.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Westview soils are on nearly level low terraces above flood plains in the Central Rolling Red Plains.  Slopes range from 0 to 1 percent.  They formed in calcareous silty sediments of Pleistocene age.  The climate is dry subhumid.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from 20 to 27 inches.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 57 to 65 degrees F.  Thornthwaite annual P-E indices range from 33 to 44.  Frost free days range from 190 to 230.  Elevation ranges from 1200 to 2000 feet.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Tipton and Altus series and the Hardeman series.  Altus and Tipton soils are on slightly higher convex areas.  Hardeman soils lack mollic epipedons and Bt horizons and occur on adjacent convex areas.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; low runoff; moderately slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mainly cultivated to cotton, wheat, alfalfa, and grain sorghum.  Native vegetation consists of tall and midgrasses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Central Rolling Red Plains of western Oklahoma and west Texas.  The series is of minor extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Harmon County, Oklahoma; 1982.
REMARKS:  These soils were formerly included with the Abilene, St.  Paul, and Tipton series in older published soil surveys.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
