LOCATION WISEMAN                WA

Established Series
Rev. WFJ/RJE
1/89

WISEMAN SERIES

The Wiseman series consists of deep, somewhat excessively
drained soils formed in alluvium derived from phyllite.
They are on alluvial fans and have slopes of 0 to 8 percent.
Average annual precipitation is about 55 inches and mean
annual air temperature is about 48 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy-skeletal, mixed, mesic Dystric Xerorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Wiseman channery sandy loam - on a 2 percent
convex south-facing slope under a forest canopy.  (Colors
are for moist soil unless otherwise stated)

    A--0 to 4 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; moderate fine granular
structure; soft, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine
roots; many very fine irregular pores; 5 percent phyllite
channers; moderately acid (pH 5.6); abrupt smooth boundary.
(2 to 8 inches thick)

    C--4 to 60 inches; dark olive gray (5Y 3/2) extremely
channery sand, olive gray (5Y 5/2) dry; single- grain;
loose; common fine and few coarse roots; 70 percent phyllite channers; moderately acid (pH 5.6).

TYPE LOCATION:  Skagit County, Washington; about 1 mile
north of Marblemount; 755 feet north and 565 feet west of
the southeast corner sec. 1, T. 35 N., R. 10 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  These soils are usually moist but
are dry in the moisture control section for 45 to 60
consecutive days following summer solstice.  Mean annual
soil temperature is 49 to 52 degrees F.  Solum thickness
ranges from 2 to 8 inches.  The particle-size control
section range from 40 to 80 percent phyllite channers by
weighted average.  Reaction is moderately acid or slightly
acid throughout.

The A horizon has hue of 7.5YR through 2.5Y, value of 2
through 5 moist, 4 through 7 dry, and chroma of 2 through 4
moist and dry.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR, 2.5Y, or 5Y, value of 2
through 5 moist, 5 through 7 dry, and chroma of 2 through 4
moist and dry.  It is very channery sand or extremely
channery sand, very channery loamy sand, or extremely
channery sand.  Some pedons have thin strata of fine sand or
silt.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Grove, Neilton, Netrac, and Snoqualmie series.  All of these soils lack phyllite
channers in the particle-size control section. In addition,
Grove soils have a B horizon with hue of 5YR or 7.5YR.
Neilton soils have a B horizon and are dry for 60 to 75
consecutive days in the moisture control section.  Netrac
soils have a 7 to 14 inch thick mantle of volcanic ash and
are dry in the moisture control section for 60 to 75
consecutive days.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Wiseman soils are on alluvial fans in
major valleys at the mouths of intermittent streams.
Elevation is 200 to 900 feet.  Slopes range from 0 to 8
percent.  These soils formed in alluvium from phyllite.  The
average annual precipitation is 40 to 75 inches.  Average
January temperature is about 37 degrees F; average July
temperature is about 62 degrees F.  The mean annual
temperature is 46 to 51 degrees F.  The frost-free season is
160 to 220 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Barneston,
Cokedale, Gilligan, and Wickersham series.  Barneston soils
have a cambic horizon.  Cokedale soils are coarse-silty over
sandy or sandy-skeletal.  Gilligan soils are medial and have
a cambic horizon.  Wickersham soils are coarse-loamy over
sandy or sandy skeletal and have a cambic horizon.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat excessively drained;
slow or very slow runoff; very rapid permeability. These
soils are subject to rare flooding.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used for woodland and pasture.  Native vegetation consists of Douglas-fir, bigleaf maple, western
redcedar, western hemlock, and red alder with an understory
of western swordfern, vine maple, western brackenfern, red elderberry, and salmonberry.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Valleys of the west slopes of the
Cascade Mountains in northwest Washington.  The series is of
small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Skagit County, Washington, 1981.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in
this pedon are an ochric epipedon from the surface to 4
inches and a 10- to 40-inch particle-size control section of
sand and gravel with less than 0.2 percent organic carbon
and a regular decrease in organic carbon with depth.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
