LOCATION WISTER                 OK

Established Series
Rev. EJA:JWF
09/2003

WISTER SERIES

The Wister series consists of deep, moderately well drained, very slowly permeable soils that formed in material weathered from
shale of Pennsylvanian age.  These nearly level to gently sloping soils are on uplands in the valleys of the Ouachita Mountains.  Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent.  Mean annual temperature is 63 degrees F., and the mean annual precipitation is 46 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, active, thermic Vertic Natrudalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Wister silt loam, rangeland.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
stated.)

     A1--0 to 8 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) silt loam, weak fine granular structure; friable; few fine black and yellowish brown concretions; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 11
inches thick)

     A2--8 to 15 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) silt loam, weak fine granular structure; friable; few fine black and yellowish concretions; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (0 to 11 inches thick)

     B21t--15 to 34 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) silty clay; few medium prominent red (2.5YR 4/6) and common medium
distinct gray (10YR 6/1) mottles; weak fine blocky structure;
firm; common fine black concretions; continuous clay films on
faces of peds; strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (6 to 28
inches thick)

     B22t--34 to 53 inches; mottled yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) and gray (10YR 6/1) silty clay; weak fine blocky structure; firm; continuous clay films on faces of peds; medium acid; clear
irregular boundary.  (0 to 23 inches thick)

     Cr--53 to 64 inches; gray (10YR 6/1) soft shale tilted about
30 degrees from horizontal; medium acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  LeFlore County, Oklahoma; about 1 mile south of Cameron; 400 feet west and 2,500 feet north of the southeast
corner of sec. 34, T. 8 N., R. 26 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness and depth to bedrock ranges from 40 to 60 inches.  The combined thickness of the A horizons is less than 20 inches.  Texture is loam or silt loam and reaction ranges from slightly acid to very strongly acid.

The A1 horizon has hue of 10YR, values of 3 or 4, and chroma of 1
to 3.  Coarse fragments less than 3 inches range from 0 to 5
percent by volume.

The A2 horizon, where present, has hue of 10YR, values of 5 or 6,
and chroma of 2 to 6.  The boundary between the lower A horizon
and the upper B horizon is clear or abrupt with an abrupt textural change.   Some pedons have as much as 15 percent interfingering of
A2 horizon into the upper 1 to 3 inches of the B2t horizon.

The B2t horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, values of 4 or 5, and
chroma of 4 to 6.  It has mottles in shades of gray, brown, red,
or yellow.  The lower part also includes mottled matrix in shades
of brown, gray, or yellow.  It is silty clay, clay, silty clay
loam, or clay loam; medium acid to very strongly acid in the upper part and medium acid to moderately alkaline in the lower part.

The B3 horizon, where present, has color, texture, and reaction similar to that of the lower B2t horizon.  It contains a few shale fragments.

The Cr horizon is olive or gray shale that is slightly weathered
and can be dug with a spade with some difficulty.  Reaction ranges from strongly acid to moderately alkaline.  It is tilted 10
degrees to 60 degrees from the horizontal.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Arriola, Barden, Cadeville,
Counts, Grubbs, Homa, Liberal, Orange, Sobol, Tupelo, and
Tuskahoma series.  Arriola soils have base saturation of 35 to 60 percent immediately above the paralithic contact and have solums
20 to 40 inches thick.  Barden, Grubbs, Liberal, Sobol, and Tupelo soils lack abrupt textural change between the A and B horizons.  Cadeville soils have upper Bt horizon colors in 2.5YR and 5YR
hues.  Counts soils have more than 60 inches of solum thickness.  Homa soils have more than 60 percent clay in the control section.  Orange soils have montmorillonitic mineralogy.  Tuskahoma soils
have a solum less than 20 inches thick.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Wister soils occur on nearly level to gently sloping uplands in the valleys of the Ouachita Mountains.  Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from
40 to 56 inches.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 59 degrees
to 60 degrees F.  Thornthwaite annual P-E indices range from 64 to 80.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Sobol
and Tuskahoma series and the Burwell, Collinsville, Moyers,
Stigler, Vian, and Wing series.  Sobol and Tuskahoma soils are on slightly higher convex ridges.  Burwell soils occur on mounds,
have fine-silty control sections and are more than 60 inches
thick.  Collinsville soils occur on ridges, lack Bt horizons and
have solums 10 to 20 inches thick.  Moyers soils occur on similar positions of the landscape and lack abrupt textural change between the A and B horizons.  Stigler and Vian soils occur on similar positions of the landscape but they have thicker solums.  Wing
soils have matrix horizons and occur in concave circular areas
within Wister soils.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Wister soils are moderately well
drained.  Runoff is medium or slow and permeability is very slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used for tame pasture, range, or native
meadow.  Native vegetation consists of an open stand of hardwoods with a grass understory.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Eastern Oklahoma and possibly western Arkansas.  The series is of minor extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Pushmataha County, Oklahoma; 1977.

REMARKS:  These soils were formerly mapped as Counts soils.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  National Soil Survey Laboratory, Lincoln,
Nebraska.  Sample Number S74-OK-127-1.

                 National Cooperative Soil Survey
                             U. S. A.


