LOCATION WODEN                  TX+AR

Established Series
GLL:RD; Rev.JDS
07/2000

WODEN SERIES

The Woden series consists of very deep, well drained soils that formed in alluvial sediments. They are on nearly level to gently sloping Pleistocene age and younger stream terraces on the Western Coastal Plain. Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, siliceous, semiactive, thermic Typic Paleudalfs

TYPICAL PEDON: Woden fine sandy loam--forest.
(Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

    Ap--0 to 7 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) fine sandy loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable; many fine and few coarse roots; common fine and medium pores; common medium worm casts; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary. (4 to 10 inches thick)

    E--7 to 11 inches; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) fine sandy loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable; common fine and medium roots; common fine and medium pores; common medium worm casts; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary. (0 to 10 inches thick)

    Bt1--11 to 15 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) fine sandy loam; weak medium prismatic structure parting to weak fine subangular blocky; slightly hard, friable; common fine and few medium roots; many fine and medium pores; few faint clay films and clay bridging on some sand grains; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.

    Bt2--15 to 43 inches; yellowish red (5YR 5/8) fine sandy loam; weak medium prismatic structure parting to moderate fine subangular blocky; slightly hard, friable; common fine roots; many very fine pores; few faint clay films and clay bridging on some sand grains; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary.

    Bt3--43 to 80 inches; yellowish red (5YR 5/8) fine sandy loam; weak medium prismatic structure parting to moderate fine subangular blocky; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; many very fine pores; few faint clay films and clay bridging on some sand grains; moderately acid; gradual wavy boundary.

    Bt4--80 to 96 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) fine sandy loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; common fine pores; few faint clay films and clay bridging on some sand grains; common medium and coarse distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) redox concentrations; moderately acid. (Combined thickness of the Bt horizon is more than 80 inches).

TYPE LOCATION: Nacogdoches County, Texas. About 10 miles southwest of Nacogdoches on Stephen F. Austin Experimental Forest, 50 feet south and 20 feet west of field road right angle turn in pine plantation, from a point 100 yards east of forest road 401C, or about 800 yards northeast (30 degrees east of north) of forest headquarters.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: The solum is more than 80 inches thick. The clay content of the control section ranges from 12 to 18 percent and the silt content exceeds 20 percent. Base saturation ranges from 35 to 60 percent at a depth of 50 inches below the top of the argillic horizon. Rounded ironstone and quartzite pebbles range from none to few throughout.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 2.5YR to 10YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 2 to 8. Texture is fine sandy loam or loam. Reaction ranges from strongly acid to slightly acid.

The E horizon has hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 2 to 4. Texture is fine sandy loam or loam. Reaction ranges from strongly acid to slightly acid.

The Bt horizon has hue of 2.5YR to 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 6 or 8. Some pedons have hue of 10YR in the lower part. Redox concentrations in shades of brown, red, or yellow range from none to few. A few streaks or spots of uncoated sand are in the lower part of the Bt horizon some pedons. Texture is fine sandy loam or loam. Reaction is strongly acid to slightly acid.

COMPETING SERIES: There are no other series in the same family. The Attoyac, Austonio, Bernaldo, Besner, Elrose, and Ruston series are in closely related families. All of these soils except Besner have a fine-loamy control section. Besner soils have a glossic horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Woden soils are on nearly level to gently sloping Pleistocene age and younger stream terraces on the Western Coastal Plain. Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent. Surfaces are plane to convex. The soil formed in loamy alluvial sediments. The climate is humid with average annual rainfall ranging from 40 to 50 inches. The mean annual temperature ranges from 65 degrees to 68 degrees F. Frost free days range from 235 to 260. The elevation ranges from 100 to 300 feet above sea level. The Thornthwaite annual P-E indices exceed 64.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the closely related Attoyac, Austonio, Bernaldo, and Besner soils, and the Bienville and Hainesville soils. All these soils are on similar terrace positions, however the sandy Bienville and Hainesville soils are commonly on slightly lower positions.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: These soils are well drained and moderately rapidly permeable. Runoff is negligible on 0 to 1 percent slopes and very low on 1 to 5 percent slopes.

USE AND VEGETATION: Used mainly for pastureland and woodland. Pasture grasses are mainly improved bermudagrass, bahiagrass, or common bermudagrass. Woodland includes shortleaf and loblolly pine, red oak, water oak, and sweetgum. Some areas are cropped to corn, small grain for grazing or truck crops.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Western Coastal Plain (MLRA 133B) in Texas and Louisiana. The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Walker County, Texas; 1975.

REMARKS: These soils were formerly included in the Ruston series.
Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in the type location pedon include:
Ochric epipedon --- 0 to 11 inches (Ap and E horizons).
Argillic horizon -- 11 to 96 inches (Bt horizon).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
