LOCATION REDLAKE                OK+TX

Established Series
Rev. ELC:JWF
02/2000

REDLAKE SERIES

The Redlake series consists of very deep, moderately well drained, very slowly permeable flood plain soils that formed in clayey and loamy alluvium of Recent age.  These nearly level soils are on the back slope of slightly concave flood plains in the Western Coastal Plain; MLRA 133B.  Mean annual precipitation is 46 inches.  Mean annual temperature is 65 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, active, thermic Vertic Eutrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Redlake clay--cultivated.
(Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 8 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) clay; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm, sticky, plastic; common fine roots; few wormcasts; moderately alkaline; abrupt smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

     Bw--8 to 42 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) clay; strong fine blocky structure; firm, sticky, plastic; common shiny ped faces; few wormcasts; calcareous; moderately alkaline; clear wavy boundary.  (21 to 50 inches thick)

     2C--42 to 72 inches; yellowish red (5YR 5/6) clay loam; structureless; firm; stratified with lenses of friable silt loam; calcareous; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  McCurtain County, Oklahoma; about 9 miles south of Idabel, Oklahoma; about 150 feet north and 50 feet west of the southeast corner of sec. 18, T. 9 S., R. 24 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 30 to 60 inches.  These soils crack when dry.  Typically, these soils are calcareous below 10 inches but some pedons are calcerous to the surface.  Reaction is mildly or moderately alkaline in all horizons.  Clay content of the control section ranges from 40 to 60 percent.

The A horizon has hue of 2.5YR or 5YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 to 4.  Where the epipedon has moist color value and chroma 3 or less, the thickness is less than 10 inches.  Texture is silty clay, clay, clay loam, loam, or very fine sandy loam.

The Bw horizon has hue of 2.5YR or 5YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 3 to 6.  Texture is clay or silty clay.  Some pedons have slickensides, but they do not intersect.

The 2C horizon has color like the Bw.  Texture is clay loam, silty clay loam, clay, or silty clay that is stratified with thin strata of silt loam, loam, very fine sand loam, or fine sandy loam.  Average clay content ranges from 30 to 45 percent.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other series in this family.  Soils in similar families are the Buxin, Coushatta, Latanier, Litro, Moreland, Pledger, Portland, Redport, Roebuck, Tuscosso, Tuscuambia, and Watsonia series.  Buxin, Latanier, Moreland, Pledger, and Roebuck soils have a mollic epipedon.  In addition, Latanier soils have a clayey over loamy control section and Roebuck soils have smectitic mineralogy.  Coushatta soils have a fine-silty control section.  Litro, Portland, and Tuscumbia soils are saturated during some period of the year.  In addition, Portland soils have a very-fine control section.  Redport soils have a mollic epipedon and have a fine-silty control section.  Tuscosso soils lack secondary carbonates within 40 inches of the soils surface and lack cracks 1 cm or more wide at a depth of 20 inches.  Watsonia soils are underlain by soft chalk or marl between depths of 10 and 20 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Redlake soils are on the back slope of slightly concave nearly level flood plains in the Western Coastal Plain.  Slopes are 0 to 1 percent.  They formed in clayey and loamy alluvium of Recent age.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from 42 to 50 inches.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 62 to 68 degrees F.  Thornthwaite annual P-E indices range from 70 to 80.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Coushatta, Latanier, Pledger and Roebuck soils and the Caspania, Gallion, Garton, Idabel, Oklared, and Severn soils.  Caspiana, Gallion, Garton, and Severn soils are on higher flood plains.  Coushatta and Idabel soils are on similar areas of the landscape.  Latanier, Oklared, Pledger and Roebuck soils are on lower areas of the flood plain.  Caspiana and Gallion soils have a fine-silty control section and argillic horizons.  In addition, Caspiana soils have a mollic epipedon.  Garton soils have a mollic epipedon and argillic horizons.  Idabel and Oklared soils have a coarse-loamy control section.  In addition, Oklared soils are calcareous throughout.  Severn soils have a coarse-silty control section and are calcerous throughout.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained.  Runoff is slow.  Permeability is very slow.  These soils are flooded for very brief periods during the months of January to May.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mainly used as cropland.  Soybeans, cotton, alfalfa, grain sorghums, and small grains are the principal crops.  Some areas are used for improved pasture.  Native vegetation is southern red oak, sweetgum, American elm, pecan, green ash, eastern cottonwood, and hackberry.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Western Coastal Plain of Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  McCurtain County, Oklahoma; 1970.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
