LOCATION REDMANSON              WY+ID

Established Series
Rev. AJC/RJE/JAL
09/2002

REDMANSON SERIES

The Redmanson series consists of very deep, well drained soils on gently to steeply sloping alluvial fans and valley-filling sideslopes. Slope gradient ranges from 1 to 15 percent. These soils formed in very gravelly alluvial fan sediments derived principally from limestone bedrock. At the type location the average annual precipitation is 18 inches with peak periods of precipitation occurring during the spring and summer months.  

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, carbonatic Typic Cryrendolls  

TYPICAL PEDON: Redmanson very gravelly silty clay loam, grassland. (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.) 

    A1--0 to 5 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) very gravelly silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (2.5Y 3/2) moist; moderate fine granular structure; soft, very friable; 60 to 70 percent limestone fragments many of which are less than 3 inches in diameter; calcareous; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); clear smooth boundary. (3 to 6 inches thick) 

    A2--5 to 15 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) very gravelly light silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (2.5Y 3/2) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure that parts to moderate fine granules; slightly hard, very friable; 60 percent limestone fragments many of which are less than 3 inches in diameter; calcareous; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); gradual smooth boundary. (3 to 14 inches thick) 

    C--15 to 60 inches; light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2) very gravelly light silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable; 65 percent limestone fragments many of which are less than 3 inches in diameter; calcareous; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0). 

TYPE LOCATION: Lincoln County, Wyoming; 600 feet southeast of the southeast corner of the Grover cemetery near the center of sec. 6, T.32N., R.118W. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: The mollic epipedon is 7 to 19 inches thick. depth to calcareous material is 0 to 4 inches, and there is no bedrock or strongly contrasting substratum above 40 inches. The mollic epipedon contains .8 to 2 percent organic carbon which decreases uniformly with depth. Calcium carbonate equivalent, including coarse fragments less than 20 millimeters in diameter, exceeds 40 percent in the control section. The fine earth fraction in the control section is typically silty clay loam or silt loam with 18 to 35 percent clay, 20 to 65 percent silt, and 10 to 60 percent sand. Coarse fragments range from 50 to 80 percent in the control section, and are mainly fine and very fine limestone gravel and thin flat fragments less than 6 inches in length. The average annual soil temperature is 45 degrees F., and the average summer soil temperature is 57 degrees F. without an O horizon. 

The A horizon has hue of 2.5Y or 10YR, value of 4 or 5 dry and 2 or 3 moist and chroma of 2 or 3. It usually has granular structure but it has weak subangular blocky structure in some pedons. It is soft to slightly hard and moderately to strongly alkaline. 

The C horizon has pedons. It is soft to slightly hard and moderately to strongly alkaline. The C horizon has pedons. It is soft to slightly hard and moderately to strongly alkaline. The C horizon has hue of 2.5Y or 10YR. It may have some secondary accumulated calcium carbonate principally as coating on the underside of the rock fragments. It is moderately to strongly alkaline. 

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Dekoom and Hatur series and the similar Ridgecrest and Urtah series. Dekoom soils have a xeric moisture regime. Hatur, Ridgecrest, and Urtah soils are 20 to 40 inches deep to a lithic contact. In addition Ridgecrest and Urtah  soils are frigid. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: These soils occur on gently to steeply sloping alluvial fans and valley-filling sideslopes. Slope gradient ranges from 1 to 15 percent. These soils formed in very gravelly alluvial fan sediments derived principally from limestone bedrock. At the type location the average annual precipitation is 18 inches with peak periods of precipitation occurring during the spring and summer months. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Hobacker, Swift Creek, and Thayne soils. Hobacker and Thayne soils have less than 40 percent calcium carbonate equivalent in or immediately below the mollic epipedon. Swift Creek soils lack a mollic epipedon. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well-drained; medium to rapid runoff; moderate permeability. 

USE AND VEGETATION: These soils are used as both dry and irrigated cropland, and as native pastureland. Principal native vegetation is bluegrass and sage. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: High mountain valleys of western Wyoming. The series is of moderate extent. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Bozeman, Montana 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Star Valley Area, Idaho and Wyoming, 1971.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: 
Mollic epipedon - The zone from the mineral soil surface to 15 inches (the A1 and A2 horizons).
Particle size control section - The zone from 10 to 40 inches (parts of the A2, and C horizons). 
Carbonatic mineralogy - greater than 40 percent CaCO3 in the less than 20mm size fraction. 
Moisture regime - ustic. 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
