LOCATION REGER                  MO

Established Series
KEB-KDV
09/2021

REGER SERIES

The Reger series consists of moderately deep, well drained soils on uplands.  Permeability is moderate.  They formed in 20 to 40 inches of residuum from sandstone, siltstone and shale.  Slopes range from 5 to 45 percent.  Mean annual temperature is 54 degrees F., and mean annual precipitation is 36 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, active, mesic Dystric Eutrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Reger very fine sandy loam - on a convex slope of about 33 percent, forested.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

   Oi--0 to 1 inches; decaying leaves and twigs.

   A--1 to 4 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) very fine sandy loam, pale brown (10YR 6/3) dry; moderate very fine granular structure; very friable; many roots; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (2 to 5 inches thick)

   E--4 to 8 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) very fine sandy loam; weak thin platy structure parting to weak fine granular; friable; many roots; 5 percent soft sandstone and siltstone fragments; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary.  (3 to 6 inches thick)

   Bw1--8 to 23 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) very fine sandy loam; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and medium roots; 40 percent soft sandstone and siltstone fragments; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   Bw2--23 to 28 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) very fine sandy loam; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; firm; few fine roots; 50 percent soft sandstone and siltstone fragments; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bw horizon is 12 to 30 inches.)

   Cr--28 to 60 inches; interbedded sandstone and siltstone.

TYPE LOCATION:  Sullivan County, Missouri; about one mile north of Reger; 350 feet east and 1700 feet south of the northwest corner of sec.  19, T. 62 N., R. 20 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The thickness of the solum and depth to weathered bedrock ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Clay percentage averages 5 to 15 percent.

The A horizon has color value of 3 to 6, and chroma of 2 to 4.  It commonly is very fine sandy loam or loam, but the range includes fine sandy loam or sandy loam.  Reaction is very strongly acid to neutral.

The E horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 3 to 6.  It is very fine sandy loam, loam or fine sandy loam.  Reaction is very strongly acid to slightly acid.  Eroded pedons commonly do not have an E horizon.

The Bw horizon has hue of 2.5Y to 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 3 to 6.  It is very fine sandy loam, fine sandy loam or loam.  In some places, it contains thin strata of finer texture.  Reaction is strongly acid to neutral.

The Cr horizon consists of thin strata of sandstone, siltstone, and shale, with sandstone the dominant material.

COMPETING SERIES:  These include the Herkimer, Lowville, Pittsfield, Stockbridge  and Urne series.  Herkimer, Lowville, Pittsfield and Stockbridge soils do not have bedrock within 40 inches and formed in calcareous glacial till.  Urne soils have mean annual temperature of 45 to 49 degrees and formed in residuum from glauconitic sandstone.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Reger soils are on upland side slopes of 5 to 45 percent.  They formed in residuum from sandstone, shale and siltstone.  The mean annual temperature ranges from 49 to 55 degrees, and the mean annual precipitation ranges from 33 to 38 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These include the Gorin, Keswick, Lindley and Winnegan soils.  These soils have more than 18 percent clay in the series control section.  Gorin soils formed in loess and pedisediment and are on narrow rounded ridgetops.  Keswick soils formed in a Sangamon paleosol and are on narrow rounded summits and upper side slopes.  Winnegan and Lindley soils formed in glacial till and are above the Reger soils on similar slopes.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is medium to very rapid.  Permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are in trees.  A few areas are in pasture.  Native vegetation is mixed hardwoods of  mostly oak and hickory species.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern Missouri.  The Reger series is inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Indianapolis, Indiana

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Sullivan County, Missouri, 1991.

REMARKS:  The Reger series was formerly included with the Gosport and Vanmeter series in northern Missouri.  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this series are:  ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 8 inches (Oi, A and E horizons); cambic horizon - the zone from a depth of approximately 8 inches to 28 inches (Bw1 and Bw2 horizons).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
