LOCATION REPARADA               PR

Established Series
Rev. RAB:LHR
06/2002

REPARADA SERIES

The Reparada series consists of very dark brown, A horizons, gray mottled clay B horizons over black muck.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, superactive, nonacid, isohyperthermic Mollic Fluvaquents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Reparada clay - pasture.
                (Colors are for moist soil.)

     Ap--0-8 inches; Very dark brown (10YR 2/2) clay; common medium distinct brown (7.5YR 4/4) and few medium distinct dark reddish brown (2.5YR 2/4) mottles; weak medium subangular blocky structure; firm, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; common fine roots; very dark gray (N 3/) coatings on ped surfaces; mildly alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to 10 inches thick)

     B2g--8-18 inches; Very dark gray (N 3/) clay; many coarse prominent dark greenish gray (5G 4/1) mottles; massive; firm, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; few fine roots; few partially decomposed plant residues; mildly alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to 12 inches thick)

     110C--18-6 inches plus; Black (10YR 2/1) decomposed, mildly alkaline organic soil material - muck.

TYPE LOCATION:  Sudeste SCD, Puerto Rico, municipality of Arroyo, from kilometer marker 131.6 of Highway 3, 0.1 mile south, 0.14 mile east, 0.4 mile south on dirt road, 40 feet east of road; 250 feet north of coconut field.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Depth to the organic horizon ranges from 12 to 20 inches.  The soils are saturated for 3 months or more.  The reaction of all horizons ranges from neutral through moderately alkaline.

The A horizon is very dark gray (10YR 3/1; N3/), black (10YR 2/1; N/4), very dark brown (10YR 2/2) or very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2; 2.5Y 3/2).  Mottles range from few through common and are in reddish hues and high chromas.  Texture of A horizons is clay or silty clay.

The B horizon ranges from very dark gray (10HR 3/1; N 3/),through gray (10YR 6/1; N 6/), or the greenish and bluish hues of the gley chart.  Structure is weak subangular blocky or structureless.

Organic layers range from hemic to sapric.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Bajura, Coloso, Corcega, Fortuna, Igualdad, Maunabo, Perchas, Pinones, Santoni, Talante, and Vayas series.  All these soils lack buried organic layers except the Pinones soils which have strongly through extremely acid reaction in the

control section.  The Bajura and Santoni soils have COLE values of more than .09 and slickensides in the control section.  The Coloso and Corcega soils have subhorizons with colors of chroma 3 or more.  The Fortuna, Manuabo, and Perchas soils have acid reactions in the control sections.  Igualdad soils have sandy or sandy-skeletal lower control sections.  The Talante soils have coarse-loam over sandy and Vayas have fine textured control sections.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Reparada soils occur on nearly level coastal lowlands with slope gradients of 0 to 2 percent.  The regolith is clayey sediments of mixed origin which overlie decomposed and partially decomposed organic materials.  The climate is semiarid tropical.  Average annual rainfall is 30 to 40 inches.  The mean annual temperature is about 79 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Catano and Poncena series and the land type Tidal flats.  The Catano soils have sandy control sections.  The Poncena soils are fine textured.  The land type Tidal flats are flooded by the sea during high tide.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained.  Runoff is slow and permeability is very slow.  Soils are saturated 3 months or more a year.

USE AND VEGETATION: Natural vegetation consists of hydrophytic plants, Para grass, and shrubs.  These soils are used for sugarcane when drained.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Semiarid coastal areas of Puerto Rico.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Soil Survey of Puerto Rico: 1942.

REMARKS:  The Reparada soils were placed in the Half-Bog great soil group.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.


