LOCATION HAGERWEST              NM

Inactive Series
Rev. SAZ/WWJ
08/2008

HAGERWEST SERIES

The Hagerwest series consists of moderately deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils that formed in eolian material, slope alluvium and alluvium derived from sandstone and shale on hills, ridges, mesas, and cuestas.  Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent. Mean annual precipitation is about 12 inches and mean annual air temperature is about 50 degrees F. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Ustic Haplargids

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hagerwest fine sandy loam -on a northeast-facing, convex, 2 percent slope in rangeland at an elevation of 7,040 feet.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

    A--0 to 2 inches; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) fine sandy loam, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; moderate fine granular structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few medium and common fine and very fine roots; many very fine irregular pores; neutral (pH 7.2); abrupt smooth boundary. (2 to 7 inches thick)

    Bt1--2 to 7 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) sandy clay loam, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; few medium and common fine and very fine roots; common very fine irregular pores; few faint clay films bridging sand grains; neutral (pH 7.2); clear smooth boundary.

    Bt2--7 to 13 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 4/6) sandy clay loam, strong brown (7.5YR 4/6) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine and very fine roots; common very fine irregular pores; common distinct clay films on faces of peds, lining pores and bridging sand grains; slightly effervescent; neutral (pH 7.2); abrupt smooth boundary. (The combined thickness of the Bt horizons is 5 to 13 inches)

    Btk--13 to 19 inches; reddish yellow (7.5YR 6/6) sandy clay loam, strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) moist; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; few fine and common very fine roots; common very fine irregular pores; few faint clay films on faces of peds; 2 percent gravel; strongly effervescent; few very fine masses of calcium carbonate; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); abrupt smooth boundary. (6 to 11 inches thick)

    Bk--19 to 35 inches; very pale brown (10YR 7/3) sandy loam, pale brown (10YR 6/3) moist; massive; hard, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine irregular pores; 10 percent gravel; strongly effervescent; few very fine masses of calcium carbonate; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4); abrupt smooth boundary. (6 to 21 inches thick)

    2R--35 inches; hard sandstone bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION: McKinley County, New Mexico: about 4.5 miles southeast of Crownpoint, New Mexico; Heart Rock Quadrangle; about 1,600 feet east and 600 feet north of the southwest corner of sec. 2, T. 16 N., R. 12 W.; latitude 35 degrees, 38 minutes, 24 seconds and longitude 108 degrees, 04 minutes, 55 seconds.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil Moisture: The SMCS is usually dry, in all parts, 105 to 160 cumulative days from April through October. It is usually moist, in some part, 50 to 105 cumulative days during the same period. It is intermittently moist in some part November through April. The period of maximum precipitation is July through September. The soil is driest during May and June. Ustic aridic moisture regime.

Soil temperature: 51 to 56 degrees F.

Depth to calcium carbonate: 8 to 23 inches

Depth to bedrock: 20 to 40 inches

Particle-size control section: 18 to 35 percent clay

Rock fragments: 0 to 15 percent sandstone gravel. All fragments are sandstone 

Other features: C horizons are present in some pedons. Some of these C horizons are derived from cretaceous alluvium that has hues of 2.5Y

A horizon:
Hue: 7.5YR or 10 YR
Value: 5 or 6 dry; 3 to 5 moist
Chroma: 4 to 6 dry and moist
Reaction: neutral or slightly alkaline

Bt horizon:
Hue: 7.5YR or 10YR
Value: 4 or 5 dry; 3 to 5 moist
Chroma: 4 to 6 dry; 3 to 6 moist
Texture: sandy clay loam or clay loam 
Reaction: neutral or slightly alkaline

Btk and Bk horizon:
Hue: 7.5YR or 10YR
Value: 5 or 7 dry; 4 to 6 moist
Chroma: 3 to 6 dry and moist
Texture: sandy clay loam, sandy loam, or clay loam
Reaction: moderately alkaline

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Balon (AZ), Blancot (NM), Bowbac (WY), Buckle (NM), Cambria (WY), Chilerojo (NM), Cushman (WY), Decolney (WY), Doakum (NM), Forkwood (WY), Fort (CO), Gaddes (AZ), Gapbutte (AZ), Gapmesa (CO), Hagerman (NM), Hiland (WY), Mentmore (NM), Oelop (NM), Olney (CO), Palacid (NM), Penistaja (NM), Pokeman (WY), Potts (WY), Pugsley (WY), Quagwa (AZ), Redpen (NM), Spangler (WY), Sundance (CO), Tamarindo (NM), Teckla (WY) and Yenlo (CO) series. Balon, Blancot, Buckle, Cambria, Decolney, Doakum, Forkwood, Fort, Mentmore, Oelop, Olney, Palacid, Penistaja, Potts, Quagwa, Redpen, Spenlo, Sundance, and Teckla soils are more than 40 inches to a lithic or paralithic contact. Bowbac, Cushman, Pokeman, Pugsley, and Spangler series are moderately deep to a paralithic contact. Gapbutte and Pawspoc soils are moderately deep to basalt bedrock. Gapmesa soils have mean annual air temperatures below 49 degrees F. Hagerman soils typically have redder hues, darker surface horizons with higher organic carbon, and have moisture patterns which receive slightly more precipitation during late spring and early summer. Los Alamos soils have pumice and ash in the control section. In addition Bowbac, Cushman, Decolney, Fort, Forkwood, Olney, Pokeman, Potts, Pugsley, Spangler, Sundance, and Teckla soils are in LRR-G and are more moist in May and June. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The Hagerwest soils formed in eolian material, slope alluvium and alluvium. Hagerwest soils are on hills, ridges, cuestas, and mesas. Slopes range from 0 to 5 percent. Mean annual precipitation ranges from 10 to 13 inches and mean annual temperature ranges from 49 to 54 degrees F. Most of the precipitation falls during the period from July through September. Frost-free period is 120 to 140 days and elevation ranges from 6,500 to 7,200 feet.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Bond, Penistaja, and Sparank soils. The Bond soils are medium textured, shallow, and on dipslopes of cuestas. The Penistaja soils are medium textured, very deep, and on fan remnants. The Sparank soils are fine textured, very deep, and on flood plains.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained.  Permeability of the soil is moderate over very slowly permeable bedrock. Runoff is negligible on slopes less than 1 percent and low to medium on 1 to 5 percent slopes.

USE AND VEGETATION: This series is used for range and wildlife habitat. Vegetation is blue grama, galleta, sand dropseed, snakeweed, prickly pear, oneseed juniper, and twoneedle pinyon.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: West central New Mexico. LRR-D, MLRA 35. The series is of limited extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED: McKinley County Area, New Mexico; McKinley County and Parts of Cibola and San Juan Counties, 2001

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon: 0 to 2 inches. (A horizon).

Argillic horizon: 2 to 19 inches. (Bt and Btk horizons).

Lithic contact: Hard sandstone at 35 inches.

Classified according to Soil Taxonomy Second Edition, 1999.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
