LOCATION HAMDEN                 OK

Established Series
Rev. WRB:JWF
09/2003

HAMDEN SERIES

The Hamden series consists of deep, moderately well drained, moderately slowly permeable soils that formed in material
weathered from interbedded sandstone and clay of Cretaceous Age.  These soils are on nearly level to very gently sloping concave uplands.  They are saturated for short periods of time during
winter and spring.  Water runs off the surface slowly and may pond for short periods of time.  Slope ranges from 0 to 2 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, active, thermic Aquic Paleudalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hamden fine sandy loam, in tame pasture.
       (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
stated.)

     Ap--0 to 5 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) fine sandy loam; common fine and medium faint dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4)
mottles; weak fine and medium granular structure; very friable;
many roots of all sizes; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (0
to 6 inches thick)

     B21t--5 to 16 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) loam; many fine faint yellowish brown and many fine distinct light brownish gray
mottles; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; friable; many roots of all sizes; clay films on faces of peds; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (8 to 15 inches thick)

     B22t--16 to 30 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) loam; many fine distinct light gray mottles; moderate medium subangular
blocky structure; friable; common roots of all sizes; clay films
on faces of peds; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (8 to
20 inches thick)

     B23t--30 to 48 inches; light gray (10YR 6/1) sandy clay; many fine and medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) and red (2.5YR 4/6) mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm; common roots of all sizes; clay films on faces of peds; few
pockets of clean sand grains; few black concretions; strongly
acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (10 to 24 inches thick)

     B24t--48 to 72 inches; light gray (10YR 6/1) sandy clay; many coarse distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) and red (2.5YR 4/6) mottles; weak medium subangular blocky structure; firm; few roots
of all sizes; patchy clay films on faces of peds; few pockets of clean sand grains; few black concretions; strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Pushmataha County, Oklahoma; about 1 mile south
and 1-1/2 miles west of Rattan; 1,585 feet south and 2,570 feet
east of the northwest corner of sec. 29, T. 4 S., R. 18 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness is more than 60 inches.  Reaction ranges from medium to very strongly acid to about 50
inches; below this it ranges from very strongly acid to mildly alkaline.  Combined thickness of the A horizon ranges from 3 to 20 inches.

The Ap or A1 horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma
of 2 or 3.  Mottles are brown or gray.

Some pedons have A2 horizons with hue of 10YR, value of 5 to 7,
and chroma of 2 or 3.  Mottles are in shades of brown or gray.

The B21t or B22t horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 5 to 7, and
chroma of 2 to 6.  Mottles are in shades of brown, red, and gray.  This horizon is loam, clay loam, or sandy clay loam.

The B23 or B24t horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 5 to 7, and
chroma of 1.  Mottles are in shades of brown, red, and gray.
Texture is clay or sandy clay with pockets of coarser materials.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Attoyac, Bernaldo, Bernow,
Elrose, Falkner, Freest, Freestone, Goldsboro, Katy, Kullit,
Nesbitt, Prue, Quitman, Rehobeth, Sawyer, Shuster, Stigler,
Tamaha, Vian, and Wrightsboro series.  Attoyac, Elrose, and Prue soils lack wetness mottles within 30 inches of the soil surface.  Bernaldo, Bernow, and Freestone soils have more than 5 percent skeletons in the argillic horizon.  Falkner, Nesbitt, and Vian
soils have fine-silty control sections.  Freest soils have an apparent water table between 1.5 and 2.5 feet of the soil surface
and they occur in areas of higher mean annual precipitation.  Goldsboro, Kullit, Quitman, Rehobeth, Sawyer, and Wrightsboro
soils have base saturation less than 35 percent at 50 inches below the top of the argillic horizon.  Katy soils have prismatic
structure and coatings on prism faces in lower part of the
argillic horizon.  Shuster, Stigler, and Tamaha soils have fine control sections.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hamden soils are on nearly level or very
gently sloping concave uplands.  Slopes range from 0 to 2 percent.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from 40 to 46 inches.  Mean
annual temperature ranges from 62 degrees to 64 degrees F.  Thornthwaite annual P-E indices are greater than 64.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Bernow series and the Bosville and Romia series.  Bosville soils have a
fine control section.  Romia soils have sola less than 60 inches thick.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Hamden soils are moderately well
drained.  Runoff is slow and permeability is moderately slow.  A perched water table is at a depth of 0.5 to 1.5 feet for short periods of time during winter and spring.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly as tame pasture for beef cattle.  Native vegetation is hardwood forest with understory of grasses.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern Coastal Plain of Oklahoma and possibly Texas and Arkansas.  The series is of minor extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Pushmataha County, Oklahoma; 1977.

REMARKS:  These soils were formerly classified in the Red-Yellow Podzolic great soil group and included in the Sawyer series.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Sample number S74-OK-64-3 from the Soil Survey Investigation Unit at Lincoln, Nebraska indicates this soil has
base saturation greater than 35 percent, and family texture is fine-loamy and mineralogy is siliceous.

 National Cooperative Soil Survey
 U. S. A.


