LOCATION HAMLIN                 NY+PA VT

Established Series
Rev. LWK-JEW-PSP
04/2025

HAMLIN SERIES

The Hamlin series consists of very deep, well drained soils formed in alluvium on flood plains and high bottoms. Saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderately high. Slope ranges from 0 to 3 percent. Mean annual air temperature is 8.9 degrees C, and mean annual precipitation is 940 millimeters.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-silty, mixed, active, mesic Dystric Fluventic Eutrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hamlin silt loam - cultivated (Colors are for moist soil.)

    Ap -- 0 to 23 centimeters; dark gray (10YR 4/1) silt loam; moderate coarse and medium granular structure; friable; many roots; neutral;  abrupt smooth boundary.  (15 to 30 centimeters thick.)

    Bw1 -- 23 to 50 centimeters; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; weak medium and coarse prismatic parting to weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine and medium roots; many fine pores; neutral; diffuse wavy boundary.

    Bw2 -- 50 to 91 centimeters; brown (10YR 5/3) silt loam; weak coarse prismatic structure; friable; few medium roots; many fine pores; neutral; diffuse wavy boundary. (Combined thickness of Bw1 and Bw2 is from 40 to 90 centimeters.)

    C -- 91 to 215 centimeters; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; massive; friable; few roots; many fine pores; few fine distinct dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) iron accumulations in the matrix; neutral.

TYPE LOCATION:  Livingston County, New York; Town of Leicester, 1.5 miles east-northeast of Village of Cuylerville, along bank of the Genesee River. USGS Geneseo, NY topographic quadrangle; Latitude 42 degrees, 47 minutes, 48 seconds N. and Longitude 77 degrees, 51 minutes, 26 seconds W., NAD 1927.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 56 to 122 centimeters. Depth to carbonates and to strongly contrasting material is more than 100 centimeters. Depth to bedrock is more than 150 centimeters. Rock fragments range from 0 to 5 percent by volume above a depth of 100 centimeters and 0 to 10 percent below. The soil is strongly acid to neutral in the upper 50 centimeters and moderately acid to mildly alkaline below.

The Ap horizon has hue of 5YR through 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 1 through 3. Dry value is 6 or 7.  It is silt loam or very fine sandy loam. It has weak or moderate, fine to coarse granular structure and very friable or friable consistence.

The B horizon has hue of 5YR through 10YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 2 through 4. It is mottled below a depth of 24 inches from the soil surface in some pedons. It is silt loam or very fine sandy loam. It has weak or moderate granular, subangular blocky or prismatic structure.

The C horizon has hue of 5YR through 10YR, value of 3 through 5, and chroma of 2 through 4. It ranges from silt loam to fine sandy loam. The C horizon is massive or it has weak platy structure from fine stratification.

COMPETING SERIES: There are no other known series in the same family.  

The Chagrin, Eel, Genesee, Hadley, Middlebury, Moshannon, Teel, Tioga and Winooski series are similar soils in closely related families. Chagrin soils have fine-loamy particle size control sections. Eel and Genesee soils have carbonates above 100 centimeters. Hadley and Winooski soils have less than 60 percent base saturation. Middlebury and Tioga soils have coarse-loamy particle-size control sections. Moshannon soils have fine-silty particle-size control sections. Teel soils have mottles of chroma of 2 or less within a depth of 60 centimeters.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Hamlin soils are nearly level soils on floodplains and high bottoms. The soils formed in post glacial alluvium mainly from areas of siltstone, shale and limestone. Mean annual precipitation ranges from 760 to 1150 millimeters, mean annual air temperature from 7.8 degrees to 10 degrees C. and growing season from 120 to 180 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: The Hamlin soils are the well drained member of a drainage sequence consisting of Sloan, Teel, Wakeville and Wayland series. The Honeoye, Lansing, Ontario and Valois soils and their wetter associates formed in till, the Alton, Howard, Hoosic and Palmyra soils in outwash, and the Amboy, Arkport and Dunkirk soils and their wetter associates in glaciolacustrine deposits.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Hamlin soils are well drained. The potential for surface runoff is very low to low. Saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderately high.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mostly cleared and used for forage and truck crops. Flooding is a hazard for the more intensive uses. Native vegetation consists of the more demanding species of northern hardwoods.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: The Lake Plains and the Allegheny Plateau of New York, Connecticut, and Vermont. MLRA's 101, 139, 140, 142, 143, and 144A. The soils are of moderate extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Monroe County area, New York, 1910.

Remarks:  The concept of Hamlin series has been a soil on flood plains, with inherent reddish brown colors. The revised concept for Hamlin is centered on soils with brown colors and a relatively wide range in reaction. This is a mesic series, its use in MLRA 143 will need to be investigated.

Diagnostic  horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:
a. Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to 23 centimeters (Ap horizon).
b. Cambic horizon - the zone from 23 to 91 centimeters (Bw horizons).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
