LOCATION HANCEVILLE             AL+GA NC TN VA

Established Series
Rev. LDS:GWH
04/2007

HANCEVILLE SERIES

The Hanceville series consists of deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils that formed in residuum weathered from sandstone
with thin strata of shale or siltstone.  These soils are on level
to steep uplands.  Slopes range from 0 to 40 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, subactive, thermic Typic Rhodudults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hanceville loam, in a cultivated area.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
stated.)

     Ap--0 to 8 inches; reddish brown (5YR 3/3) loam; weak medium granular structure; friable; common fine roots; few fine brown and black concretions; few fine fragments of sandstone; slightly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (0 to 9 inches thick)

     B21t--8 to 17 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) clay loam; red
(2.5YR 4/6) dry; moderate medium subangular blocky parting to weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable, sticky, plastic; few
fine roots; few thin clay films mainly in pores; few fine brown
and black concretions; few coarse fragments of sandstone; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

     B22t--17 to 54 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) clay; red (2.5YR 4/6) dry; moderate medium subangular blocky parting to moderate
fine subangular blocky structure; friable, sticky, plastic; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds and in pores; few fine brown
and black concretions; few coarse weathered fragments of
sandstone; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the B2t horizon is 40 to 67 inches)

     B3--54 to 63 inches; dark red (2.5YR 3/6) clay loam; red
(2.5YR 4/6) dry; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; common weathered fragments of sandstone up to about 6 inches long; few fine yellowish brown concretions; very strongly acid, gradual wavy boundary.  (3 to 10 inches thick)

     Cr--63 to 90 inches; reddish, broken and weathered sandstone with some sandy loam soil material in the cracks.

TYPE LOCATION:  Blount County, Alabama; 50 yards south of the junction of highways US-231 and Ala-79 which is about a mile north
of Cleveland.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 40 to 72 inches.  Depth to strongly cemented or indurated bedrock ranges
from 5 to 9 feet or more.  Soil reaction is strongly or very
strongly acid throughout except where the surface has been limed.

The A horizon has hue of 10R through 7.5YR, value of 2.5 or 3, and chroma of 2 through 6.  Some pedons have an A1 horizon that has
hue of 10YR, value of 2 or 3, and chroma of 2.  Texture of the A horizon is fine sandy loam, sandy loam, or loam.

The B2t horizon has hue of 2.5YR or 10R, value of 3 or 4, and
chroma of 2 through 6.  The lower part of the Bt horizon may have
few to common mottles in shades of brown or yellow.  Texture is
clay loam, sandy clay, or clay.  The upper 20 inches of the B2t horizon contains 10 to 40 percent silt.

The B3 horizon has colors similar to the B2t horizon; or has hue
of 2.5YR or 10R, value of 5, and chroma of 6.  Texture is fine
sandy loam, sandy clay loam, or clay loam.  Reddish sandstone fragments are few to common.

The Cr horizon consists of weathered weakly cemented red, yellow,
or brown sandstone with soil material filling the cracks.  Lenses
of shale are common.

COMPETING SERIES:  The Stoneville series is the only known series
in the same family.  Stoneville soils have a Cr horizon within 60 inches of the surface.  Competing series in related families are
the Anniston, Davidson, and Decatur series.  These soils have kaolinitic mineralogy.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hanceville soils are mostly on broad smooth plateaus, mountaintops or hilltops, but there is a small acreage
on hillsides.  Slopes are commonly 2 to 15 percent, but range from
0 to 40 percent.  The regolith is weathered from sandstone, shale,
or silt loam.  Climate is temperate-humid.  Near the type
location, the mean annual air temperature is about 62 degrees F.,
and the mean annual precipitation is about 48 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Albertville, Cane, Gorgas, Hartsells, Linker, Nauvoo, Nectar, and Townley series.  Albertville, Hartsells, Linker, Nauvoo, Nectar, and Townley soils
are on similar landforms and have weathered or unweathered bedrock
at depths of 20 to 60 inches of the surface.  Cane soils are on adjacent toe slopes and have a fragipan.  Gorgas soils are on adjacent (usually steep) side slopes and are shallow to hard sandstone bedrock.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained, medium runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Much of the soil has been cleared and is used for cropland.  Cotton, corn, and vegetables are the common crops.  Most of the remainder is used for hay or improved pasture.  Small acreages which have never been cleared are in mixed pine and
hardwood forests.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Alabama, North Carolina, Tennessee, and possibly Missouri and Oklahoma.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Cullman County, Alabama; 1908.

                 National Cooperative Soil Survey
                             U. S. A.


