LOCATION HANNAHATCHEE           TX+LA

Established Series
KG:RD:GLL;Rev. JDS
11/2004

HANNAHATCHEE SERIES

The Hannahatchee series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately permeable loamy soils on flood plains. These soils formed in stratified loamy alluvial sediments that are high in glauconite. Slopes range from 0 to 1 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, active, thermic Dystric Fluventic Eutrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON: Hannahatchee loam--in pastureland. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

 A--0 to 9 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) loam; weak medium granular structure; soft, very friable; many fine and common medium roots; common fine and medium pores; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary. (4 to 15 inches thick)

 Bw1--9 to 21 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, many fine and few medium roots; common fine and medium pores; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary.

 Bw2--21 to 54 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) sandy clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; common fine and few medium roots; common fine and few medium pores; moderately acid; gradual smooth boundary.

 Bw3--54 to 80 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) sandy clay loam; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; slightly hard; friable; few fine roots; few fine and medium pores; moderately acid. (combined thickness of the Bw subhorizons is more than 70 inches)

TYPE LOCATION: Nacogdoches County, Texas; from the intersection of Texas Highway 21 and Farm Road 225 at Douglas; 08 mile north on Farm Road 225 to creek bottom; 0.1 mile east, about 100 feet from stream channel in improved bermudagrass pasture. (Latitude 34 degrees N, 40', 42"; Longitude 94 degrees W, 52', 29")

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Solum thickness: More than 80 inches
Clay content in the Control Section: 18 to 25 percent
Redoximorphic features: Iron depletions in shades of gray, and iron concentrations in shades of brown, red or yellow range from few to common at 40 to 60 inches deep.
Other distinctive soil features: None
Concentrated minerals: Base saturation is 60 percent or greater in some subhorizon at a depth of 10 to 30 inches. Organic carbon ranges from 0.2 to 0.4 percent at a depth of 50 inches below the soil surface. Ironstone pebbles and iron-manganese concretions range from 0 to 5 percent throughout.

A horizon:
Color--Hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 3 or 4 and chroma of 2 to 8
Redoximorphic features--None
Texture--Fine sandy loam, very fine sandy loam, or loam
Other features--None
Reaction--Moderately acid to neutral

Bw horizon:
Color--Hue of 2.5YR to 7.5YR, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 4 to 6
Redoximorphic features--Iron depletions in shades of gray, and iron concentrations in shades of brown, red or yellow range from few to common at 40 to 60 inches deep.
Texture--Fine sandy loam to sandy clay loam, however subhorizons of clay loam are present in some pedons
Other features--None
Reaction--Moderately acid to neutral

Ab horizon: (where present)
Color--Hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 or 4, and chroma of 2 or 3
Redoximorphic features--Iron depletions in shades of gray, and iron concentrations in shades of brown, red or yellow range from none to common
Texture--Fine sandy loam to sandy clay loam
Other features--Depth to a buried A horizon is more than 40 inches.
Reaction--Moderately acid to neutral

COMPETING SERIES: This is the Sullivan series in this family. Iulus, Iuka, Laneville, Marietta, Owentown, Thenas, and Tuscosso series are in closely related families. All of these soils except Tuscosso have colors with hue yellower than 5YR, and are formed in sediments that do not contain appreciable amounts of glauconite. In addition, Tuscosso soils have a fine textured control section. Also, Iuka, Iulus, Owentown, and Thenas soils have a coarse-loamy control section. Laneville and Marietta soils have redox depletions within 24 inches of the soil surface.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Hannahatchee soils are on nearly level flood plains. Slopes range from 0 to 1 percent. These soils formed in loamy alluvium high in glauconite, derived mainly from the Weches formation or a glauconitic member of the Reklaw formation. Average annual temperature ranges from 64 to 68 degrees F. Frost free days range from 235 to 260 and elevation ranges from 90 to 180 feet above sea level. The annual rainfall ranges from 40 to 50 inches and the Thornthwaite P-E indices exceeds 64.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the closely related Iulus, Laneville, and Tuscosso soils which are on similar flood plain positions; and the Alto, Cuthbert, Nacogdoches, Redsprings, Ulto, and Trawick soils. Alto, Cuthbert, Nacogdoches, Redsprings, Ulto, and Trawick soils all have an argillic horizon and are on higher surrounding uplands.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Hannahatchee soils are well drained and moderately permeable. Runoff is negligible. The soil is wet in the layers below 4 to 6 feet deep during December through April in normal years.

USE AND VEGETATION: Used mainly for pasture, but some areas are in woodland. Native pastures are the most common use, but some improved pastures have bahiagrass, improved bermudagrass, or common bermudagrass. Some pastures are overseeded with legumes. Woodland areas produce lobolly or shortleaf pine mixed with oak, gum, and hickory. Native grasses include Florida paspalum, wildrye, switchgrass, various panicums and longleaf uniola.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Western Coastal Plain (MLRA 133B). The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Stewart County, Georgia; 1913.

REMARKS: These soils were formerly classified as Alluvial soils. The mineralogy was changed from mixed to siliceous in January, 1993 based on laboratory data from NSSL. Activity class was assigned to active in February 2000 based on data fron NSSL samples and comparison with associated soils. The series was updated in 2004 to recognize an apparent water table at 4 to 6 feet deep based on wetness studies and observations in Marion-Cass Counties, and Nacogdoches County Texas.

Diagnostic Horizons and Features in this pedon:
Ochric epipedon --0 to 9 inches
Cambic horizon --9 to 80 inches

ADDITIONAL DATA: NSSL characterization data are available on pedon no. S88TX-225-001 (Houston County, Texas), and pedon no. S88TX-347-002 (Nacogdoches County, Texas). Texas A&M organic carbon distribution data are available for three pedons from the Marion-Cass Survey Area in Texas (S94TX-616-005, 006, and 007).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
