LOCATION HANOVER                PA+OH

Established Series
Rev. DRM-AWD
05/2025

HANOVER SERIES

The Hanover series consists of deep, moderately well drained and well drained soils formed in weathered Illinoian glacial till with a thin mantle of loess in some areas.  These soils are on uplands and have slopes ranging from 0 to 40 percent.  Saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderately high or moderately low above the fragipan and low in the fragipan.  Mean annual precipitation is about 965 centimeters, and mean annual air temperature is about 10 degrees C.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, semiactive, mesic Typic Fragiudults

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hanover silt loam - on a 3 percent convex ridgetop in a cultivated field.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

   Ap--0 to 23 centimeters; brown (10YR 4/3) silt loam, pale brown (10YR 6/3) dry; weak fine granular structure; friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; 5 percent coarse fragments; very strongly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (15 to 25 centimeters thick)

   BE--23 to 38 centimeters; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; slightly sticky and slightly plastic; 10 percent coarse fragments; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.  (0 to 25 centimeters thick)

   Bt--38 to 64 centimeters; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) gravelly silt loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; firm, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common thin clay films on faces of peds and lining pores; 15 percent coarse fragments; very strongly acid acid; clear wavy boundary.  (15 to 46 centimeters thick)

   Btx1--64 to 112 centimeters; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) gravelly silt loam; moderate very coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; very firm; brittle, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; common thick clay films on faces of peds; common medium distinct light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) iron depletions; common prominent black (10YR 2/1) manganese films on ped faces; 15 percent coarse fragments; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   Btx2--112 to 142 centimeters; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) gravelly loam; weak very coarse prismatic structure parting to weak thin platy; very firm, brittle, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common thick clay films on faces of ped and in pores; few fine faint yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) mases of iron accumulation and few fine distinct light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) iron depletions; 15 percent coarse fragments; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   Btx3--142 to 180 centimeters; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) gravelly silt loam; weak very coarse prismatic structure parting to weak thin platy; very firm, brittle, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common thick clay films on faces of peds and in pores;  few fine faint yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) mases of iron accumulation and common medium distinct light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) iron depletions; 15 percent coarse fragments; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

TYPE LOCATION:  Crawford County, Pennsylvania; Oil Creek Township; 4 kilometers northeast of Titusville, 200 meters north of the intersection of Spring Creek Road (SR 2023) and Windfall Road (T-920). 7.5 minute USGS quad: Titusville North. Latitude 41.653971, Longitude -79.648092. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness is typically greater than 183 centimeters but ranges from 150 centimeters to 280 centimeters.  Depth to the fragipan is 40 to 89 centimeters.  Some pedons have a mantle of loess up to 40 centimeters thick and have 2B and 2C horizons.  Rock fragments, mostly gravel-sized subrounded fragments of sandstone and shale, are 2 to 25 percent, by volume, in the solum below any loess mantle and 5 to 35 percent in the C horizon.  Stony and very stony phases are recognized.

The Ap horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 and 6 or 7 dry, and chroma of 2 of 3.  Some pedons have an A horizon up to 4 inches thick that has value of 2 or 3.  The Ap or A horizon commonly is silt loam or loam and less commonly their gravelly, stony, or very stony analogs.  It is very strongly acid to slightly acid.

Some pedons have a BA, BE, or E horizon that has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6 moist and 6 to 8 dry, and chroma of 2 to 4.  It has texture range similar to the A horizon.  It is very strongly acid to moderately acid.

The Bt horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value and chroma of 4 to 6.  Some pedons have  redoximorphic features, but iron depletions of chroma 2 or less are only in the lower part.  The Bt horizon is loam, silt loam, clay loam, or their gravelly analogs with subhorizons of silty clay loam in some pedons.  It is very strongly acid to slightly acid.

The Btx horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4 to 6.  It is loam, silt loam, clay loam, or their gravelly analogs.  It is moderately acid to very strongly acid in the upper part and strongly acid or very strongly acid in the lower part.

Some pedons have BC horizons up to 76 centimeters thick that have similar color and texture range as the Btx horizon.  It is strongly acid or very strongly acid. Some pedons also have C horizons with similar colors to Btx and BC horizons. C horizons are sandy loam, loam, clay loam, or their gravelly or very gravelly analogues.  Reaction ranges from very strongly acid to mildly alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Annandale, Beltsville, Landisburg, Monongahela, and York series in the same family, and the Califon, Delassus,  Meckesville, Tonti, and Watson series in a closely related family.  Annadale and Califon soils have coarse fragments dominated by granite gneiss.  Beltsville soils have strong or very strong structure in the fragipan and have a few waterworn pebbles.  Delassus soils have coarse fragments dominated by grantic saprolite. Landisburg soils have coarse fragments dominated by chert.  Meckesville, Trego, and Watson soils have fragipans the have redder hue.  Monongahela soils have waterworn coarse fragments. Tonti soils have more coarse fragments in the lower part of the fragipan and the coarse fragments are dominated by chert.  York soils have sola less than 150 centimeters thick. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hanover soils are on till plains, moraines, and till-covered sandstone hills.  The slope range is dominantly 2 to 18 percent but ranges from 0 to 40 percent.  The soils formed in glacial till of Illinoian age.  A thin loess cap less than 40 centimeters thick is present in some areas, especially toward the southern part of the area of distribution.  Mean annual precipitation is about 1000 to 1175 millimeters, and mean annual air temperature is about 7.5 to 9.5 degrees C.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Alvira, Chili, Conotton, Gresham, Lordstown, Loudonville, Shelmadine, and Titusville soils.  Chili and Conotton soils are on nearby terraces. Lordstown and Loudonville soils are on till-covered sandstone and shale hills where bedrock is at depths of less than 100 centimeters.  The somewhat poorly drained Alvira and Gresham soils, poorly drained Shelmadine, and moderately well drained Titusville soils are in a toposequence with Hanover soils and are on the lower parts of some slopes or in concave landscape positions.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained and well drained.  Runoff is medium to very rapid, depending on slope.  Saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderately high or moderately low above the fragipan and low in the fragipan. 

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are used for cropland and pasture.  Principal crops are hay, small grain, and corn.  Steeper slopes are in woodland.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Western Pennsylvania and small areas in Central Ohio. MLRA 139. The series is of moderate extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Muskingum County, Ohio, 1925.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
