LOCATION HARTSHORN              OH

Established Series
TNR-DRM; Rev. DHK
01/2006

HARTSHORN SERIES

The Hartshorn series consists of deep, well drained soils that formed in local alluvium and very gravelly alluvium is within a depth of 30 inches. Permeability is moderate or moderately rapid in the upper loamy material and moderately rapid or rapid in the underlying material. Slopes range from 0 to 2 percent. Mean annual precipitation is about 40 inches, and mean annual temperature is about 53 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy over sandy or sandy-skeletal, mixed, active, mesic Dystric Fluventic Eutrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON: Hartshorn silt loam - meadow. (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

	Ap--0 to 6 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) silt loam, pale brown (10YR 6/3) dry; fine and medium granular structure; friable; many roots; 5 percent gravel; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (3 to 8 inches thick)

	Bw1--6 to 10 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4) silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable common roots; 10 percent gravel; moderately acid; clear smooth boundary.

	Bw2--10 to 15 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4) gravelly silt loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common roots; 20 percent gravel; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary.

	Bw3--15 to 19 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4) very gravelly loam; massive; few faint dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) clay films on gravel; few roots; 40 percent gravel; moderately acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (Combined thickness of the Bw horizons is 10 to 22 inches.)

	2C--19 to 56 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4) very gravelly loamy sand; few roots; 50 percent gravel; slightly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.

	3R--56 inches; hard sandstone bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION: Monroe County, Ohio; Wayne Township; 340 feet east and 680 feet south of the center of sec. 20, T. 5 N., R. 6 W., 105 feet south of Wayne Township Road 263, and 265 feet west of small stream.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness ranges from 15 to 30 inches. Depth of bedrock ranges from 40 to 72 inches. Coarse fragments range from 0 to 35 percent in the Ap horizon, 5 to 40 percent in individual horizons in the Bw horizon and 35 to 85 percent in the 2C horizons.

The Ap or A horizons have hue of 10YR, value of 3 or 4 (5 or 6 dry), and chroma of 2 to 4. It is silt loam, loam, gravelly silt loam, or gravelly loam. It commonly is medium acid but ranges to neutral.

The Bw horizon has hue of 7.5YR, 10YR, or 2.5Y; value of 3 to 5; and chroma of 3 or 4. It is silt loam, loam, or their gravelly or very gravelly analogues; but gravelly and very gravelly textures are most common in the lower part. It is neutral to strongly acid.

The 2C horizon has hue of 7.5YR, 10YR, or 2.5Y; value of 3 to 5; and chroma of 3 or 4. It is very gravelly or extremely gravelly analogues of loamy sand or sand. Some pedons have thin strata of very gravelly or extremely gravelly analogues of sandy loam and loam. The C horizon is neutral to medium acid.

COMPETING SERIES: There are no other series in this family. Similar soils in related families are the Barbour, Bermudian, Boonesboro, Burnside, Chagrin, Clifty, Skidmore, and Tioga soils. Barbour soils have less than 60 percent base saturation within a depth of 30 inches and are coarse-loamy in the upper part of the control section. Bermudian, Chagrin, and Tioga soils lack sandy or sandy-skeletal horizons within a depth of 40 inches. In addition, Tioga soils are coarse-loamy. Boonesboro soils have bedrock at depths less than 40 inches. Burnside and Skidmore soils contain more than 35 percent coarse fragments in the particle-size control section. Clifty soils have less than 60 percent base saturation within a depth of 30 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Hartshorn soils occur on narrow flood plains, principally along small streams near the headwaters of the drainage system. Slopes range from 0 to 2 percent. The soils formed in local alluvium that typically is loamy in the upper part and sandy and gravelly in the lower part. It consists of sediments washed from soils formed in interbedded sandstone, siltstone, and shale. Mean annual precipitation ranges from 38 to 42 inches, and mean annual temperature ranges from about 50 degrees to 54 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the competing Chagrin and the Ashton, Elkinsville, Hackers, Hayter, Newark, and Nolin series. All of the above soils lack very gravelly textures within a depth of 60 inches. Chagrin, Nolin, and the somewhat poorly drained Newark soils are on wider flood plains along larger streams. Ashton, Elkinsville, Hackers, and Hayter soils are on stream terraces or alluvial fans.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained. Permeability is moderate or moderately rapid in the upper loamy material and moderately rapid or rapid in the underlying material. The soils are flooded for brief periods in spring months or as a result of local thunderstorms.

USE AND VEGETATION: Much of this soil is used for pasture. About one-fourth is cultivated with corn, small grains, and vegetables as the main crops. A few areas are forested.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Occurs in southeastern Ohio and possibly in nearby areas of Kentucky, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania. The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Monroe County, Ohio, 1970.

REMARKS: The 01/2006 revision updates this soil to the 9th Edition of the Keys to Soil Taxonomy (2003). The CEC activity class placement is based on associated soils and not on laboratory data. Class placement may be revised in the future when laboratory data are reviewed or become available.

Competing series, pedon description (including horizon nomenclature and/or descriptive terms), and other sections on the OSD were not revised.

Diagnostic horizons recognized in this pedon are: 
Ochric epipedon - from the surface to a depth of about 6 inches (Ap horizon) 
Cambic horizon - the zone from a depth of about 6 to 19 inches (Bw1, Bw2, Bw3 horizons).

ADDITIONAL DATA: Engineering test data published in the Monroe County, Ohio, Soil Survey report (MN-49).

Previous revision dates: 05/86-TNR, DRM

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
