LOCATION HAWKSNEST              NY

Established Series
Rev. STS-JWW
01/2022

HAWKSNEST SERIES

The Hawksnest series consists of shallow, somewhat excessively drained and well drained soils formed in glacial till.  They are nearly level to very steep soils on glaciated bedrock controlled uplands.  Slopes range from 0 to 70 percent.  Permeability is moderate or moderately rapid throughout.  Mean annual temperature is 44 degrees F and mean annual precipitation is about 52 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, mixed, active, frigid Lithic Dystrudepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hawksnest loam, forested from an area of Hawksnest-Mongaup loams.  (Colors are for moist soil)

 Oe--0 to 2 inches; black (5YR 2/1) partially decomposed leaf-litter.

 A--2 to 3 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 2/2) loam; weak medium granular structure; very friable; many fine and common medium roots; 10 percent rock fragments; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary (1 to 4 inches thick).

 E--3 to 7 inches; reddish gray (5YR 5/2) channery loam; moderate fine platy structure; friable; many fine and common medium roots; many fine vesicular pores; 20 percent rock fragments; strongly acid; clear wavy boundary (0 to 5 inches thick).

 Bw1--7 to 12 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) loam; weak medium and fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common medium and large roots; many fine vesicular pores; 10 percent rock fragments; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

 Bw2--12 to 18 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) and dark reddish brown (5YR 3/2) silt loam; weak medium and fine subangular blocky structure; friable; common medium and large roots; many fine and medium vesicular pores; 5 percent rock fragments; very strongly acid.  (Combined thickness of the Bw horizon is 7 to 15 inches;)

 2R--18 inches; massive grayish brown sandstone bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Sullivan County, New York, Town of Rockland, 200 feet east of Elm Hollow Road; 1.1 miles north of the intersection of Elm Hollow and Mud Pond Roads.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the solum and depth to bedrock ranges from 10 to 20 inches.  Rock fragments range from 5 to 35 percent throughout the soil.  Reaction ranges from extremely acid to strongly acid throughout the soil.

Some pedons have an Oi horizon.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 10YR through 5YR, value of 2 through 4 and chroma of 1 through 3.  It is silt loam to fine sandy loam in the fine earth fraction.  Structure is weak or moderate fine or medium granular. Consistence is friable or very friable.

The E horizon has hue of 10YR through 5YR, value of 5 or 6 and chroma of 2 or 3.  It is loam to sandy loam in the fine earth fraction.  Structure is weak or moderate fine platy of fine or medium subangular blocky.

The Bw horizon has hue of 10YR through 5YR, value of 3 through 5 and chroma of 3 through 8.  It is silt loam to sandy loam in the fine earth fraction.  Consistence is friable or very friable.

The 2R horizon is sandstone, siltstone or shale.  In many pedons it is interbedded.  The bedrock is horizontally bedded.

COMPETING SERIES:  The Barto, Glover and Insula soils are in the same family.  Barto and Insula soils have rock fragments dominated by granite.  Glover soils are dominated by rock fragments of shistose, quartzose and phyllite.
The Arnot, Catlett, Dimal, Halcott, Klinesville, Nassau, Unicoi and Weikert soils are in related families but all except Halcott have mesic Temperature regimes.  Halcott soils have loamy-skeletal particle size control sections.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hawknest soils are nearly level to very steep soils on bedrock controlled uplands.  Slopes range form 0 to 70 percent.  They formed in a thin mantle of glacial till derived from reddish or brownish, acid sandstone, siltstone, and shale.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 40 to 45 degrees F, annual precipitation ranges from 38 to 55 inches and the growing season ranges from 90 to 120 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the proposed Elka, Lewbeach, Mongaup, Onteora, Suny, Tor and Willowemoc soils.  Elka, Lewbeach and Willowemoc soils are very deep; Onteora soils are very deep and somewhat poorly drained.  Suny soils are very deep and poorly or very poorly drained.  The Mongaup and Tor soils are on the same landscape.  Mongaup soils are moderately deep.  Tor soils are somewhat poorly drained or poorly drained.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat excessively drained and well drained.  Permeability is moderate or moderately rapid throughout.  Runoff is medium to very rapid.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mainly forested.  A few areas are cleared and used for improved pasture.  Native trees are mostly sugar maple, red maple, beech, black cherry, ash, birch, and hemlock.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Central-Eastern New York State at higher elevations in the Catskill Mountains.  The series is moderately extensive with an estimated 20,000 acres.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Sullivan County, New York, 1984.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to a depth of 7 inches (Oe, A, E horizons).

Cambic horizon - the zone from 7 to 18 inches (Bw1, Bw2 horizons) with less than 60 percent base saturation as evidenced by very strongly acid reaction.

Lithic contact - bedrock at 18 inches.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
