LOCATION HENRY                  TN+AR KY MS

Established Series
Rev. CBB:RPS:LBW
02/2013

HENRY SERIES

The Henry series consists of very deep, poorly drained soils that have a slowly permeable fragipan in the subsoil.  These soils formed in loess more than 4 feet in thick in depressions and nearly level areas on uplands and terraces; MLRA 134.  Slopes are dominantly less than 1 percent, but range from 0 to 2 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-silty, mixed, active, thermic Typic Fragiaqualfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Henry silt loam--cultivated.                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

     Ap--0 to 9 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; very friable; few small concretions; strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

     Eg1--9 to 20 inches; gray (10YR 5/1) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; very friable; common medium pores; common, medium distinct dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2), brown (10YR 4/3), and light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) iron accumulations; common fine concretions; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (7 to 15 inches thick)

     Eg2--20 to 31 inches; gray (10YR 5/1) silt loam; weak fine granular structure; friable; somewhat brittle; many small vesicular pores; few medium distinct brown (10YR 4/3) iron accumulations; common dark brown concretions; very strongly acid; clear irregular boundary. (6 to 12 inches thick)

     Btxg--31 to 50 inches; gray (10YR 5/1) light silty clay loam; seams and tubes of gray silt; very coarse prisms about 6 or 8 inches in diameter breaking to weak coarse prisms and weak medium subangular blocky structure; firm; brittle; many very fine and fine pores; clay films 1/8 inch in thickness between large prisms in upper part; many thick clay films within prisms in upper 4 inches, thin patchy clay films in lower part, all mostly on vertical faces; many brown concretions; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (17 to 30 inches thick)

     BCg--50 to 60 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine pores; common thin black stains in cracks and small holes; common medium faint gray (10YR 5/1) iron depletions and common medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/4)iron accumulations; many small concretions; medium acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (10 to 20 inches thick)

     C--60 to 90 inches; pale brown (10YR 6/3) silt; structureless, massive; friable; many medium faint light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) iron depletions and many medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) iron accumulations; medium acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Shelby County, Tennessee; 1/4 mile west of Houston-Levee Road; 75 yards south of Dogwood Road; 125 feet northeast of large willow-oak tree.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of solum ranges from 48 to more than 72 inches.  Depth to the fragipan ranges from 20 to 36 inches.  Reaction is strongly acid or very strongly acid in the A, E and B horizons and ranges from strongly acid to mildly alkaline in the BC and C horizons.  Surface layers are less acid where recently limed.  Depth to a horizon with more than 10 percent sand is 40 inches or more.  Clay content between 10 inches and the top of the fragipan ranges from 10 to 18 percent.  Much of the illuvial clay is in vertical streaks and pockets rather than being uniformly distributed throughout the B horizon.

The Ap horizon, or A if present, has hue of 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Iron accumulations and depletions range from none to common in shades of brown, yellow, and gray.  

The Eg horizon has chroma of 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 1 or 2.  Iron accumulations and depletions are in shades of brown, yellow, and gray.  The A horizon texture is dominantly silt loam, but also includes silt.

The Btxg horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 5 to 7, and chroma of 1 or 2.  Iron accumulations and depletions are in shades of brown, yellow, and gray.  Some pedons are variegated in shades of brown, yellow and gray without a dominant matrix color.  It is silt loam or silty clay loam.

The BC and C horizons have hue of 10YR, value of 5 to 7, and
chroma of 1 to 3.  Some pedons have a 2BC and/or 2C horizon with hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 4.  These brown colors are in the Roxana loess formation where it occurs within 3 to 5 feet of the surface.  Iron accumulations and depletions are in shades of brown, yellow, and gray.  The texture is silt loam or silt.

COMPETING SERIES:  Henry is the only series in this family.  

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Henry soils are in depressions, broad drainageways, or on nearly level areas in the uplands or on
terraces of low relief.  They formed in silty material (loess) more than 4 feet in thickness.  At the type location average annual temperature is 60 degrees F., and average annual precipitation is 49 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Bonn, Calhoun, Calloway, Foley, Grenada and Routon series.  Bonn and Foley soils are a fine-silty family, contain natric horizons and no fragipan.  Calhoun and Routon soils are in a fine-silty family and do not contain a fragipan.  Calloway and Grenada soils are in a fine-silty family and are moderately well drained.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained; runoff is negligible to slow and some areas receive runoff from adjacent areas.  Permeability is slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas have been cleared.  Pasture, soybeans, and rice are the main uses.  Some areas are in corn and cotton.  Wooded areas are in oaks, sweetgum, sycamore, hackberry, and elm.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Tennessee, Kentucky, Mississippi, Arkansas, and possibly Louisiana and Missouri.  The series is of large extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: AUBURN, ALABAMA

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Henry County, Tennessee; 1922.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon- surface to 31 inches (Ap, Eg1 and Eg2 horizons)
Albic horizon-9 to 31 inches (Eg1 and Eg2 horizons)
Argillic horizon-31  to 50 inches (Btxg horizon)
Fragipan-31 to 50 inches (Btxg horizon)

Henry series was formerly classified in the Planosols great soil group.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
