LOCATION HEUVELTON              NY

Established Series
Rev. SCC-JWW-SWF-GWS
10/2015

HEUVELTON SERIES

The Heuvelton series consists of very deep, moderately well drained soils formed in lacustrine and marine sediments. They are on gently sloping to steep landforms on lake and marine plains. Slope ranges from 0 to 60 percent. The mean annual air temperature is 7 degrees C. and mean annual precipitation is 1000 mm.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, mixed, active, frigid Aquic Hapludalfs 

TYPICAL PEDON: Heuvelton silty clay loam -- on a 5 percent north-west facing slope in a hayfield. (Colors are for moist soil.) 

    Ap--0 to 18 cm; brown (10YR 4/3) silty clay loam; moderate very fine and fine granular and moderate medium subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine and few medium roots; common fine vesicular and few fine and medium tubular pores; strongly acid; abrupt smooth boundary. (13 to 23 cm thick)

    BE--18 to 28 cm; brown (10YR 5/3) silty clay; moderate fine and medium angular blocky structure; friable; many fine and few medium roots; common fine vesicular and common fine and medium tubular pores; few faint clay films in pores; common fine faint yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) masses of iron accumulation; strongly acid; clear smooth boundary. (0 to 10 cm thick.) 

    Bt--28 to 56 cm; brown (10YR 4/3) clay; moderate fine and medium subangular blocky structure; friable; common fine roots; many fine vesicular and common fine and medium tubular pores; common distinct brown (10YR 5/3) clay films on faces of peds and in pores; many coarse distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) masses of iron accumulation and few medium faint grayish brown (10YR 5/2) iron depletions; moderately acid; clear wavy boundary. (25 to 69 cm thick) 

    C1--56 to 102 cm; brown (7.5YR 4/4) silty clay loam; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) faces of peds; strong fine and medium platy structure with occasional weak coarse prisms; firm; few fine and medium roots; few fine and medium vesicular and tubular pores, few macro pores; neutral; clear irregular boundary. (28 to 71 cm thick) 

    C2--102 to 183 cm; brown (10YR 5/3) varved silty clay loam with bands of very fine sandy loam; moderate medium platy structure; firm; few fine roots; few medium vesicular and few very fine and fine tubular pores; brown (10YR 4/3) silt coats on faces of peds; few fine distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) masses of iron accumulation; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline. 

TYPE LOCATION: St. Lawrence County, New York; Town of Gouverneur, 80 feet north northwest of the junction of U.S. Route 11 and farm access road, 1 mile south of junction of Bristol Road and U.S. Route 11. USGS Richville, NY topographic quadrangle; latitude 44 degrees, 22 minutes, 58 seconds N. and longitude 75 degrees, 25 minutes, 4 seconds W. NAD 1927. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Thickness of the solum ranges from 51 to 102 cm. Depth to carbonates ranges from 51 to 178 cm. Rock fragments range from 0 to 25 percent in surface and subsurface horizons, and from 0 to 10 percent below. Reaction ranges from strongly acid to neutral above the Bt horizon, moderately acid to slightly alkaline in the Bt and BC horizons, and neutral to moderately alkaline below. 

The A horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 2 to 4, and chroma of 1 to 3. The texture of the fine earth is silt loam, silty clay loam, clay loam, or silty clay. It has weak to strong, fine or medium, granular or subangular blocky structure. Consistance is friable or very friable. 

Some pedons have an E horizon that has hue of 7.5YR to 5Y, value of 5 or 6, and chroma of 2 or 3. Faint redox features range from none to common. Texture is silt loam, silty clay loam, clay loam, or silty clay in the fine-earth fraction. It has weak or moderate, angular, subangular blocky or platy structure. Consistance is very friable to firm. 

The BE horizon, where present, is similar to the Bt and E horizon in color and consistence, similar to the E horizon in texture, and differs only in size of structure and exhibits less evidence of translocated clay. 

The Bt horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 5Y, value of 3 to 6, and chroma of 2 to 4. It has both redox accumulations and depletions. In pedons with matrix color of chroma 2 the color is lithochromic and not evidence of aquic conditions. Texture of the fine earth fraction is clay, silty clay, or silty clay loam. It has moderate or strong, medium or coarse, angular or subangular blocky structure with or without coarse or very coarse prisms. Consistance is friable, firm or very firm. 

Some pedons have a BC horizon that differ from the Bt horizons mainly in containing free carbonates, and is similar to the C horizon in texture. It has mainly coarse or very coarse prismatic structure, but includes blocky structure. It is friable, firm or very firm. 

The C or Cg horizon has hue of 5YR to 5Y, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 1 to 4. It is commonly varved with texture of silt loam, silty clay loam, silty clay or clay, and with thin bands of fine sand and very fine sand in varves. It is massive or has platy structure inherited from varving. 

COMPETING SERIES: There are no series is in the same family. 

Collamer, Hudson, Muskellunge and Vergennes are similar soils in related families. Collamer soils have a fine silty particle-size control section and are mesic. Hudson soils are mesic. Muskellunge soils have an aquic moisture regime. Vergennes soils have a very fine particle-size control section and are mesic. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Heuvelton soils are nearly level to very steep on glacial lake and marine plains. Slope ranges from 0 to 60 percent. Elevation ranges from 30 to 230 meters above sea-level. Mean annual temperature ranges from 4 to 9 degrees C. Mean annual precipitation ranges from 790 to 1490 mm. The frost free period is 100 to 160 days. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the somewhat poorly drained Muskellunge, and the poorly to very poorly drained Adjidaumo soils that are associated in a drainage sequence with Heuvelton soils, and the Elmwood, Guff, Insula, Matoon, Millsite, Quetico, Ruse and Swanton soils. Elmwood and Swanton soils formed in coarse-loamy materials that overlie clayey lacustrine sediments. In addition, Swanton soils occupy wetter parts of the landscape. The poorly drained Guff and somewhat poorly drained Matoon soils are moderately deep to bedrock. The Insula, Millsite, Quetico and Ruse soils formed in glacial till on nearby bedrock controlled landscapes and are all less than 102 cm deep to bedrock. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Moderately well drained. The potential for surface runoff is medium to very high. Saturated hydraulic conductivity is moderately low or moderately high in the surface, subsurface, and subsoil horizons, and low or moderately low in the substratum.

USE AND VEGETATION: Most areas have been cleared and are used to grow corn, small grains, hay and pasture. Steeper areas are pastured or are reverting to brushy woodland. Native vegetation is sugar maple, white ash, hickory, oak, white pine, white cedar, red cedar and hemlock. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: St. Lawrence River Valley of New York, and the Champlain Plain of New York and possibly Vermont. MLRA 142. The series is believed to be moderately extensive. 
MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts. 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Jefferson County, New York, 1983. 

Remarks: This series finally reclassified to the Aquic Hapludalfs subgroup. Lab data to support classification can be obtained from the following pedons: S81NY-089-11, 13, 17, 18, 38, 39, 40 and S82NY-089-05 and 16. 

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: 
1. Ochric epipedon - The zone from 0 to 28 cm (Ap & BE horizons). 
2. Argillic horizon - The zone from 28 to 56 cm (Bt horizon). 
3. Aquic subgroup - The zone from 28 to 53 cm, the upper 10 inches of the argillic, has chroma 2 redoximorphic depletions at 11 inches. 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
