LOCATION HIDEOUT                UT

Established Series
Rev. RJL//CSW/JWB
07/2008

HIDEOUT SERIES

The Hideout series consists of very shallow and shallow, well drained soils that formed in eolian deposits and slope alluvium over residuum derived from interbedded sedimentary rocks.  Hideout soils are on hillslopes, scarps, and structural benches.  Slopes range from 2 to 50 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 10 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 47 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Loamy, mixed, superactive, calcareous, mesic Lithic Ustic Torriorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hideout fine sandy loam, on a northwest-facing, linear, 18 percent slope in Utah juniper rangeland at an elevation of 5,000 feet.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)  

    A--0 to 2 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) fine sandy loam, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; weak fine blocky structure parting to single grain; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few very fine roots; common very fine, few fine tubular and interstitial pores; very slightly effervescent, carbonates are disseminated; moderately alkaline (pH 8.2); abrupt smooth boundary.  (1 to 3 inches thick)

    C--2 to 10 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) fine sandy loam, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine, few fine and medium roots; common very fine, few fine tubular and interstitial pores; very slightly effervescent, carbonates are disseminated; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4); abrupt smooth boundary.  (3 to 18 inches thick)

    R--10 inches; sandstone bedrock with fractures greater than 4 inches apart.

TYPE LOCATION:  Uintah County, Utah; about 4.5 miles south of Split Mountain; located about 2,500 feet north and 1,500 feet west of the southeast corner of sec. 8, T. 5 S., R. 24 E., SLBM; Split Mountain, Utah USGS quad; lat. 40 degrees 23 minutes 57 seconds N. and long. 109 degrees 14 minutes 7 seconds W., NAD 27

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture:  Soil moisture control section is usually dry, but intermittently moist during late summer and early fall.  Aridic moisture regime bordering on Ustic.
Mean annual soil temperature:  47 to 50 degrees F.
Depth to lithic contact:  4 to 20 inches to sandstone bedrock

Particle-size control section:  5 to 18 percent clay

A horizon:
Hue:  7.5YR or 10YR
Value:  4 to 6 dry, 3 to 5 moist
Chroma:  3 to 6 dry or moist
Texture:  fine sandy loam, sandy loam, gravelly fine sandy loam, or very gravelly fine sandy loam
Reaction:  slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline

C horizon:
Hue:  7.5YR or 10YR
Value:  4 to 7 dry, 3 to 6 moist
Chroma:  3 to 6 dry or moist
Texture:  gravelly fine sandy loam, channery fine sandy loam, cobbly fine sandy loam, fine sandy loam or sandy loam
Reaction:  slightly alkaline to strongly alkaline 

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Bigmon (T), Kenzo, Lazear, Rizno, Redspear, Rizozo, Skyvillage, Travson, Travessilla, and Zukan series.

Bigmon:  have Cr horizons and have MAAT of 47 to 49 degrees F.


Kenzo:  have soil temperatures greater than 50 degrees F.

Lazear:  have more than 18 percent clay in the particle-size control section.

Redspear, Rizno, and Rizozo:  have hue redder than 7.5YR.

Skyvillage:  Do not have soil moisture control sections affected by an even distribution of precipitation throughout the year.  The soil moisture control section is dry mid-February through June and periodically moist November to mid-February.

Travson:  has dry periods in late summer and early fall and receives most of its precipitation during April, May, and June

Travessilla and Zukan:  have mean annual soil temperatures greater than 50 degrees F.  Zukan also has secondary calcium carbonate accumulations.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Parent material:  eolian deposits and slope alluvium over residuum derived from sandstone and interbedded sedimentary rock
Landform:  hillslopes, ledges, scarps and structural benches
Slopes:  2 to 50 percent
Elevation: 4,500 to 7,000 feet
Mean annual air temperature:  45 to 50 degrees F.
Mean annual precipitation:  8 to 12 inches
Precipitation pattern: Wettest months are July to October and driest months are December and June. 
Frost-free period:  110 to 150 days

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Begay, Mespun, and Montwel series.  

Begay soils are on fan remnants and are very deep.

Mespun soils are on ridges and are very deep.

Montwel soils are hillslopes and are moderately deep.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained, low and medium runoff, moderately rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  The major uses are wildlife habitat, rangeland, and recreation.  The potential native plant community is Utah juniper, black sagebrush, Indian ricegrass, galleta, and bluebunch wheatgrass.  This soil has been correlated to Semidesert Shallow Loam (Utah Juniper-Pinyon) - 034XY233UT range site in Utah.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northeast and central Utah.  LRR D, MLRA 34.  This series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Bozeman, Montana

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Uintah County, Uintah Area Soil Survey, Utah. 1998.  The name is taken from a geographic location in the area.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Particle-size control section:  The zone from the surface to 10 inches.  (A and C horizons)
Ochric epipedon:  The zone from 0 to 2 inches.  (A horizon)
Lithic contact:  The contact with unweathered sandstone bedrock at 10 inches.  (R layer)

The cation exchange activity class was inferred from laboratory data from similar soils in the Uintah Area Soil Survey.

Taxonomic version:  Tenth Edition, 2006.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
