LOCATION HIDEAWAY               CA

Established Series
Rev. JEM-ECH-ET
02/2003

HIDEAWAY SERIES

The Hideaway series consists of well drained medium textured Lithosols developed on basaltic flow rock.  They occur on nearly level to rolling relief on means capped by the basaltic flow.  The cover is annual grasses and forbs with scattered Digger pine or live oak.  The soils are brown, very stony loams or clay loams, strongly acid and shallow to bedrock. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, acid, thermic Lithic Xerorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hideaway very stony loam (grass and herbaceous cover, uncultivated on 2 percent slope).

     A1--0 to 10 inches; Brown (10YR 5/3) very stony loam, dark brown (10YR 4/3) when moist; very weak very fine granular structure; slightly hard to hard, friable; numerous very fine pores and fine roots; moderately low in organic matter; very strongly acid (pH 5.0); abrupt irregular boundary.  0 to 12 inches thick.

     R--10 inches +; Black or very dark gray somewhat scoriaceous basalt showing little or no weathering.

TYPE LOCATION:  Madera County, California; near center Sec. 29, T. 9 S., R. 22 E., near Hideaway Ranch, Kennedy, Table Mountain.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The soils range in color from dark brown to brown (10YR 5/3, 4/3); in texture from fine sandy loam to clay loam (>18 clay) and are stony to very stony.  The reaction is usually strongly acid but may be medium acid in the upper A becoming strongly acid with depth.  The soils are 3 to 12 inches in depth to hard bedrock.  Occasional fissures in the lava flow have filled with soil material for several feet.

COMPETING SERIES:

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Nearly level to rolling.  Occasional basinlike depressions. Hideaway soils occur at elevations of about 1,500 to 2,400 feet in a moist subhumid mesothermal climate having a mean annual precipitation of about 17 to 25 inches with hot, dry summers and cool, moist winters; an average January temperature of 42 degrees F.; an average July temperature of 78 degrees F., with a mean annual temperature of about 57 - 60 degrees F.  The average frost-free season is about 200 to 240 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: Hideaway soils occur in the same general area as the Ahwahnee, Coarsegold and Vista soils.  They are similar to the Friant, Goulding, Tollhouse, and Toomes.  The Friant soils are shallow Brunizems with neutral to slightly acid fine sandy loam A horizons developed in quartz mica schist.  The Goulding soils are slightly acid to neutral throughout.  Tollhouse are dark grayish brown, moderately coarse textured, shallow soils developed on granite.  Toomes soils are slightly acid throughout.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Surface runoff is very slow to medium and permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Range pasture exclusively. Vegetation is short grasses and annual weeds.  Some Digger pines, live oak and brush along edges of mesas.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Sierra Nevada foothills of central California. They are of very limited extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Davis, California

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Madera Area, California, 1959. (Source of name is Hideaway Ranch, Madera County.)

REMARKS: The activity class was added to the classification in February of 2003. Competing series were not checked at that time. - ET

OSED scanned by SSQA.  Last revised by state on 4/64.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
