LOCATION HIDVALLE               AZ

Established Series
Rev. DJP/JLF/PDC
08/2006

HIDVALLE SERIES

The Hidvalle series consists of very deep, well drained soils in draws and on stream terraces.  These soils formed in alluvium and eolian deposits derived dominantly from sandstone and shale.  Slope is 1 to 6 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 15 inches.  The mean annual air temperature is about 53 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-silty, mixed, superactive, mesic Aridic Haplustepts 

TYPICAL PEDON: Hidvalle very fine sandy loam - rangeland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted)

    A--0 to 2 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/3) very fine sandy loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) moist; weak thick platy structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; many very fine roots; many very fine interstitial pores; noneffervescent; slightly alkaline (pH 7.4); abrupt smooth boundary. (1 to 3 inches thick)

    Bw1--2 to 6 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) very fine sandy loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky and slightly plastic; many very fine roots; common very fine tubular pores; noneffervescent; slightly alkaline (pH 7.6); abrupt smooth boundary. (4 to 8 inches thick)

    Bw2--6 to 18 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) very fine sandy loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) moist; weak coarse prismatic structure; slightly hard, friable, nonsticky and slightly plastic; many very fine roots; common very fine tubular pores; noneffervescent; slightly alkaline (pH 7.6); abrupt wavy boundary.  (8 to 14 inches thick)

    Bk1--18 to 29 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/3) very fine sandy loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) moist; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, nonsticky and slightly plastic; many very fine roots; common very fine tubular pores; few fine soft calcium carbonate masses and thin coatings in pores; strongly effervescent, 5 percent calcium carbonate equivalent; slightly alkaline (pH 7.8); clear wavy boundary. (8 to 12 inches thick)

    Bk2--29 to 42 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/3) very fine sandy loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3) moist; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, nonsticky and slightly plastic; many very fine roots; common very fine tubular pores; few fine and medium soft calcium carbonate masses and common thin coatings on ped faces and in pores; violently effervescent, 7 percent calcium carbonate equivalent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); abrupt smooth boundary. (10 to 15 inches thick)

    Bk3--42 to 60 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/4) very fine sandy loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) moist; weak coarse subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few very fine roots; few very fine tubular pores; few thin soft filaments of calcium carbonate, 6 percent calcium carbonate equivalent; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0).

TYPE LOCATION:  Coconino County, Arizona; 400 feet west and 1700 feet south of the northeast corner of Section 20, T. 26 N., R. 9 W.; about 2 miles west of Hidden Valley Tank on the Hualapai Indian Reservation.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil Moisture: Intermittently moist in some part of the soil moisture control section during July - September and December - March.  Driest during May and June.  Aridic ustic soil moisture regime.

Soil Temperature: 54 to 56 degrees F.

Bw horizon
Hue: 5YR, 2.5YR
Value: 4 or 6 dry, 3 or 4 moist
Chroma: 3 through 6, dry or moist
Reaction: neutral or slightly alkaline
Texture: very fine sandy loam, loam

Bk horizon
Value: 4 or 6 dry, 3 through 5 moist
Chroma: 3 through 6, dry or moist
Texture: very fine sandy loam, loam
Reaction: slightly to moderately alkaline
Calcium carbonate equivalent: averages less than 10 percent

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Glendo (WY) series. Glendo soils are in LRR-G and are more moist in May and June.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hidvalle soils are in draws and on stream terraces at elevations of 5300 to 5900 feet.  These soils formed in alluvium and eolian deposits derived from sandstone and shale.  Slopes range from 1 to 6 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is 14 to 16 inches.  The mean annual air temperature is 52 to 54 degrees F.  The frost-free period is 130 to 160 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Coconino, Metuck, and Wodomont soils.  Coconino soils are moderately deep to sandstone.  Metuck and Wodomont soils have a lithic contact at depths less than 20 inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Hidvalle soils are used for livestock grazing and wildlife habitat.  The present vegetation is blue grama, ring muhly, fourwing saltbush and winterfat.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: Northwestern Arizona.  This series is of small extent. MLRA 35.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Coconino County; Soil survey of Hualapai-Havasupai Area, Parts of Coconino, Mohave and Yavapai Counties; 1993.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon: The zone from 0 to 2 inches (A horizon)

Cambic horizon:  The zone from 2 to 29 inches (Bw1, Bw2 horizons)

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
