LOCATION HIGHVIEW               OK

Established Series
REV. GFS:CS
07/98

HIGHVIEW SERIES

The Highview series consists of shallow, well drained, slowly permeable soils formed in colluvial material weathered from gray Permian shale.  These sloping to steep soils are on backslopes of hills on uplands in the Central Rolling Red Prairies (MLRA 80A). Slopes range from 5 to 45 percent. Mean annual air temperature is 60 degrees F., and mean annual precipitation is 32 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Clayey, mixed, active, thermic, shallow Udic Haplustepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Highview channery silty clay - on a 40 percent slope in native rangeland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

A--0 to 6 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) channery silty clay, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak fine angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; many fine roots; about 20 percent coarse fragments; 70 percent of surface covered by coarse fragments from siltstone and dolomite; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (3 to 6 inches thick)

Bw--6 to 17 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) channery silty clay, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; moderate very fine angular blocky structure; extremely hard, very firm; common fine roots; about 20 percent coarse fragments; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 15 inches thick)

Cr--17 to 25 inches; grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) weathered shale, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Noble County, Oklahoma; about 2 miles east and 5 miles south of Billings; 500 ft east and 2100 ft south of the northwest corner, section 22, T. 23 N., R. 2 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The thickness of the solum and the depth to shale range from 8 to 20 inches.

The A horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 2 or 3.  Some pedons have hue of 5YR in this horizon where the colluvial surface is influenced by red sandstone and shale.  Texture is silty clay, silty clay loam, channery silty clay, channery silty clay loam, very channery silty clay loam, very channery silty clay, or very channery clay loam.  Reaction ranges from mildly alkaline to moderately alkaline.

The Bw horizon has hue of 10YR to 5Y, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 1 or 2.  Texture is silty clay, silty clay loam, channery silty clay, very channery silty clay, or very channery silty clay loam.  Some pedons are calcareous in this horizon.

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Masham series in the same family.  The Masham soils have hue of 5YR or redder throughout the solum.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Highview soils are on sloping to steep back slopes and foot slopes on uplands in the Central Rolling Red Prairies (MLRA 80A).  Slopes range from 5 to 45 percent.  The soil formed in colluvial material weathered from clayey, gray Permian shale.  Mean annual temperature ranges from 57 to 61 degrees F.  The mean annual precipitation is 30 to 36 inches. Thornthwaite annual P-E indices range from 48 to 60.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Masham series, and the Lucien, Steedman and Westsum series. The Masham soils are on similar landscapes where the shales are redder.  Steedman soils are on gently sloping or sloping back slopes and foot slopes.  Lucien soils are on summits above the Highview soils and are underlain by red sandstone at depths less than 20 inches.  Westsum soils are on very gently sloping or gently sloping back slopes and foot slopes.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; rapid runoff; slowly permeable.

USE AND VEGETATION:  The principal use is for rangeland.  Native vegetation is little bluestem, sideoats grama, dropseed, silver bluestem, hairy grama, blue grama, and buffalograss.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Central Rolling Red Prairies (MLRA 80A) of Oklahoma and possibly Kansas.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES PROPOSED:  Noble County, Oklahoma; 1990.

REMARKS:  Highview soils were formerly included in the Owens series in the earlier soil survey of Noble County, Oklahoma.

Diagnostic horizons:
Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of approximately 6 inches (A horizon).
Cambic horizon - the zone from approximately 6 to 17 inches (Bw horizon).

Soil Interpretation Record: OK0359 Highview Series
                            OK0357 Highview Series, Gravelly

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
