LOCATION HOADLY                 VA+MD

Established Series
Rev. JHE-DDR
03/2022

HOADLY SERIES

Soils of the Hoadly series are very deep, moderately well drained to somewhat poorly drained, with slow permeability.  They formed partly in colluvium from adjacent higher lying soils and partly in residuum from granite gneiss and schist of the Piedmont Plateau.  Slopes commonly range from 0 to 15 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 38 inches and mean annual temperature is about 56 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, siliceous, active, mesic Aquic Fragiudalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hoadly loam on a 4 percent slope in a mixed hardwood and pine forest.  (Colors are for moist soil.)

    Oi--0 to 1 inch; partially decomposed, hardwood leaves, pine needles and twigs.

    A--1 to 3 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) loam; moderate fine granular structure; very friable; many fine, medium and coarse roots; 1 percent angular quartz; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (0 to 4 inches thick.)

    E--3 to 12 inches; light yellowish brown (2.5Y 6/4) loam; moderate fine granular structure; very friable; many fine, medium and coarse roots; 1 percent angular quartz gravel; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (0 to 12 inches thick.)

    BE--12 to 16 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) loam; weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly plastic; many fine and medium roots; few thin patchy films of clay on faces of peds; 1 percent angular quartz gravel; few fine flakes of mica; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.

    Bt--16 to 30 inches; brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) clay loam; common medium and coarse light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) and light gray (10YR 7/1) and few fine strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) mottles; moderate fine and medium subangular blocky structure; friable, slightly plastic; common fine and medium roots; common distinct films of clay on faces of peds; few fine flakes of mica; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (Combine thickness of the B above the fragipan ranges from 6 to 30 inches.)

    2Bx--30 to 42 inches; mottled, brownish yellow (10YR 6/8), light gray (10YR 7/1) and reddish yellow (7.5YR 6/6) sandy clay loam; moderate medium platy structure; firm, brittle polygonal structure 6 to 12 inches in diameter; cracks filled with light gray clay; 5 percent angular and subrounded quartz gravel; few very fine flakes of mica; strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (The Bx horizon ranges from 10 to 30 inches thick.)

    2Bt--42 to 54 inches; light gray to gray (10YR 6/1) sandy clay; common fine brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) mottles; moderate medium and coarse prismatic structure; very firm, plastic slightly sticky; many sand coatings and few distinct clay films on faces of peds; very strongly acid; gradual smooth boundary.  (0 to 16 inches thick.)

    2C--54 to 73 inches; light gray to gray (10YR 6/1) sandy loam; common fine mottles in shades of brown and yellow; massive, very friable; saprolite from granite gneiss; many fine flakes of mica; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Prince William County, Virginia; about 1 mile south of Independent Hill.  About 500 yards east of Route 619 and about 50 yards north of small stream.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from about 40 to 60 inches.  Depth to fragipan layer ranges from 15 to 34 inches.  Depth to bedrock is greater than 5 feet.  Rock fragments of angular and subrounded quartz gravel range from 1 to 15 percent with higher concentrations commonly at the lithologic discontinuity.  Flakes of mica are few in the upper B horizon and range to many in the 2B and C horizons.  The soil is very strongly acid through slightly acid.

The A or AP horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y value of 2 through 5 and chroma of 2 or 4.  It is loam, sandy loam or fine sandy loam.

The E horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y; value of 5 through 7, and chroma of 2 through 4.  The E horizon is loam, sandy loam or fine sandy loam.

The upper B horizon has hue of 7.5YR, 10YR or 2.5Y; value of 4 through 6 and chroma of 4 through 8.  Mottling with chroma of 2 or less is in the upper 10 inches.  It is sandy loam, loam, sandy clay loam, or clay loam.  The 2Bx horizon is commonly mottled in shades of brown, yellow and gray, sandy loam, loam or sandy clay loam.  It ranges from 6 to 30 inches thick and is firm platy and brittle.  Stone lines from 2 to 6 inches thick range from 2 to 30 percent of angular and subrounded quartz gravel.

The 2B horizon is commonly mottled in shades of yellow, brown, and gray sandy clay, sandy clay loam, loam, clay loam or clay.  Some pedons do not have a 2B horizon.

The 2C horizon is mottled in shades of yellow, brown, and gray loam, sandy loam or sandy clay loam.  It is saprolite from weathered granite, granite gneiss or schist.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no competing series in the same family.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hoadly soils are in saddle positions, on toe slopes and around heads of drainageways in the Northern Piedmont Plateau uplands.  Elevations range from about 150 to 400 feet.  Slope ranges from 0 to 15 percent.  The soil developed partly in colluvium and partly in residuum from granite, granite gneiss and schist.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from 36 to 40 inches and mean annual temperature ranges from 50 to 57 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Baile, Buckhall, Fairfax, Meadowville and Occoquan soils.  These soils do not have a fragipan.  In addition, the Baile soil is poorly drained and on lower positions in the landscape.  The Buckhall and Fairfax soils have clay subsoils and are well drained.  The Meadowville soil is well drained and in lower positions in the landscape.  The Occoquan soil is somewhat excessively drained.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained and somewhat poorly drained; runoff is moderate; permeability is very slow in the fragipan layer; perched water table is above the fragipan; and apparent water table is common in winter and spring months below the fragipan.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Largest acreage is in hardwood and pine forest.  Small acreage is used for the general crops, corn, soybeans, small grains, pasture and hay.  Some of the hardwood trees are oak, maple, and yellow poplar.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern Virginia and Maryland; moderate extent; 3,500 acres in Prince William County.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Prince William County, Virginia, 1985.

REMARKS:  This soil has previously been included in the Colfax series which has mixed mineralogy and is in the thermic temperature zone.

03/2022 revision: Oi had 1 to 0 inch depths, corrected to be 0 to 1 in horizon depths then added 1 inch to all horizon depths throughout the typical pedon. WJN

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
