LOCATION HOLLYWOOD              AL+KY LA OK TN VA

Established Series
Rev. LFR
08/2011

HOLLYWOOD SERIES

The Hollywood series consists of deep, moderately well drained,
very slowly permeable soils that formed in clayey colluvial
sediments over limestone.  These soils are on narrow lower
footslopes and on depressed upland areas.  Water runs slowly off
the surface.  Slope is dominantly less tha 3 percent but ranges up
to 8 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic, thermic Oxyaquic Hapluderts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hollywood clay loam, in idle field.
                (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
stated.)

     Ap--0 to 4 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay loam;
moderate medium granular structure; friable; common fine black and brown concretions; slightly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.  (0 to 7 inches thick)

     A12--4 to 19 inches; black (10YR 2/1) silty clay; moderate coarse blocky structure parting to strong medium granular;
friable; pressure faces on surfaces of some coarse peds; common
fine brown and black concretions; neutral; diffuse wavy boundary.  (10 to 24 inches thick)

     A13--19 to 27 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) silty clay;
few fine faint dark gray and dark brown mottles; moderate coarse blocky structure parting to moderate fine subangular blocky; firm; common intersecting slickensides that form parallelepipeds;
pressure faces on surfaces of some coarse peds; common black and brown concretions; mildly alkaline; gradual irregular boundary.
(7 to 20 inches thick)

     AC--27 to 48 inches; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/4) silty clay; common medium distinct dark gray (10YR 4/1) and dark brown (7.5YR 4/4) mottles; moderate coarse blocky structure parting to moderate medium subangular blocky; very firm; common slickensides that form parallepipeds; pressure faces on surfaces of most peds; common
black and brown concretions; common soft bodies of calcium
carbonate; few fragments of limestone; moderately alkaline;
gradual wavy boundary.  (12 to 24 inches thick)

     ACca--48 to 72 inches; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/4) silty
clay; many medium distinct grayish brown (10YR 5/2) and dark brown (7.5YR 4/4) mottles; common intersecting slickensides form parallelepipeds that part to weak medium blocky structure; very
firm; pressure faces on surfaces of most peds; common black and
brown concretions; few fragments of limestone; common calcium carbonate concretions; common soft bodies of calcium carbonate; moderately alkaline.  (0 to 30 inches thick)

     R--72 inches; limestone bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Lawrence County, Alabama; .2 mile east of Young Brothers Store, 150 feet south of Alabama Highway 24 in NW1/4SE1/4sec. 5, T. 7 S., R. 10 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Depth to slickensides ranges from 12 to
30 inches.  Depth to the AC horizon ranges from 18 to 40 inches.  Depth to secondary calcium carbonate accumulation ranges from 25
to 50 inches.  Depth to limestone bedrock ranges from 4 to 8 feet.  Untilled soils have a gilgai microrelief.  The cycles of
microknolls and microbasins are repeated at linear intervals of 4
to 12 feet.  For these areas the microknolls are 3 to 10 inches higher than the microbasins.  The amplitude between the A and AC horizons ranges from about 3 to 24 inches.

The Ap horizon is slightly acid through moderately alkaline, and
the remaining horizons are neutral, mildly alkaline, or moderately alkaline.  The A horizon has hue of 10YR, values of 2 or 3, and chroma 1.  The A1 or Ap is clay loam, silty clay loam, or silty
clay.  The lower A horizons are silty clay or clay.

The AC horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y, values of 4 or 5, chroma
4; and hue of 5Y, value of 4, and chroma 2.  It is silty clay or clay.  Mottles are gray, brown, and yellow.  Soft powdery bodies
of calcium carbonate range from 2 to 20 percent by volume of the
AC horizon.  Few to common fragments of limestone occur in the AC horizon.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Beaumont, Brooksville, Burleson, Clarita, Eutaw, Garner, Houston, Houston Black, Lake Charles, Okolona, Randall, Roscoe, and San Saba series.  Beaumont, Eutaw,
and Garner soils have color values of 3.5 or more within a depth
of 12 inches in more than half of each pedon.  Brooksville,
Houston, and Okolona soils have color chromas of 1.5 or greater in the A horizon.  In addition, Houston soils have more than 60
percent clay in the control section.  Burleson, Clarita, Houston Black, Randall, Roscoe, and San Saba soils have cracks that remain open more than 90 cumulative days in most years.  Lake Charles
soils have matrix color chromas of less than 1.5 to a depth of 40 inches or more and lack ACca horizons with soft powdery lime.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hollywood soils are on uplands which have depressional or sloping relief.  Slopes range from 0 through 8 percent.  These soils formed in clayey colluvial sediments over limestone.  The climate is warm and humid.  Near the type location the average annual temperature is about 61 degrees F., and the average annual precipitation is about 47 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Colbert,
Dowellton, Panola, Talbott, Tupelo, and Swink series.  Colbert, Talbott, and Swink soils are in more convex landscapes and have greater slope gradients.  Colbert soils have strongly acid B horizons.  Dowellton, Panola, and Tupelo soils are in similar landscapes and have comparable slope gradients.  Dowellton soils
have B horizons and mixed clay mineralogy.  Panola, Talbott, and Tupelo soils lack intersecting slickensides within a depth of 30 inches.  Swink soils have more than 35 percent coarse fragments within the control section and have sola less than 20 inches
thick.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained; slow runoff; very slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used primarily for pasture or hay crops.
Some areas are used for the production of corn, grain sorghum, and soybeans.  Untilled areas now have principal vegetation of tall
and native grasses with an open canopy of Bois d' Arc, winged elm, and redcedar to a sparse forest of oak, hickory, locust, elm, gum, and redcedar.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Alabama, Oklahoma, Tennessee, and Texas.  The series is moderately extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Jackson County, Alabama; 1911.

REMARKS:  The Hollywood series was formerly classified in the Grumusols great soil group.

          National Cooperative Soil Survey
          U. S. A.
