LOCATION HUDDLESTON             VA

Tentative Series
RJH
10/2021

HUDDLESTON SERIES

MLRA(s): 136 (mesic part)
Soil Survey Regional Office (SSRO) Responsible: Raleigh, North Carolina
Depth Class: Very deep
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Well drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Very deep
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Low to high
Permeability: Moderate
Shrink-Swell Potential: Low
Landscape: Piedmont upland
Landform: Hill, ridge, interfluve
Geomorphic Component: Crest, interfluve, side slope, nose slope, head slope
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, backslope
Parent Material: Weathered mica schist and biotite gneiss
Slope: 2 to 60 percent
Elevation (type location): 740 feet
Frost Free Period (type location): 210 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature (type location): 57 degrees F.
Mean Annual Precipitation (type location): 44 inches 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, micaceous, mesic Typic Hapludults

TYPICAL PEDON: Huddleston fine sandy loam, 25 to 40 percent slopes in woodland. (Colors are for moist soil).

   Oi--0 to 3 inches; loose leaves, twigs, and partly decomposed organic material.

   A--3 to 5 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) fine sandy loam; weak fine granular structure; soft, very friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many fine, and few medium and coarse roots; few medium flakes of mica; neutral; abrupt wavy boundary.

   E--5 to 12 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) fine sandy loam; weak fine granular structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine, and few medium and coarse roots; 2 percent quartz gravel; few medium flakes of mica; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   BE--12 to 15 inches; yellowish red (5YR 5/6) sandy clay loam; weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine, and few medium and coarse roots; many faint clay films; common medium flakes of mica; very strongly acid; clear wavy boundary.

   Bt--15 to 31 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6) sandy clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine, and few medium and coarse roots; many faint clay films; many medium flakes of mica; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

   BC--31 to 39 inches; reddish brown (5YR 4/4) sandy loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; common fine roots; common faint clay films; many medium flakes of mica; 40 percent soft crushable mica schist; very strongly acid; gradual wavy boundary.

   C--39 to 75 inches; yellowish red (5YR 4/6), strong brown (7.5YR 5/8), and dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) saprolite of mica schist and mica gneiss that crushes to sandy loam; massive; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common fine roots; many medium flakes of mica; common clay flows coat some rock faces; very strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION: Bedford County, Virginia; about 4,500 feet south and 1,250 feet east of the intersection of Virginia Route 825 and US Highway 460.  Goode USGS topographic quadrangle; lat. 37 degrees 18 minutes 2 seconds N. and long. 79 degrees 28 minutes 7 seconds W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:
Depth to top of Argillic horizon: 1 to 15 inches
Depth to base of Argillic horizon: 15 inches or more
Depth to Bedrock: Greater than 60 inches
Rock Fragment Content: 0 to 10 percent in the A, E, and B horizons and 0 to 15 percent in the C horizons; mostly gravel, cobbles or stones, but may include channers and flagstones
Soil Reaction: very strongly acid to slightly acid in the A, Ap, and E horizons, and from very strongly acid to moderately acid in the Bt, BC, and C horizons. 
Mica Content: common to many in the A horizon and many in the Bt, BC, and C horizons. Mica content increases with depth.

RANGE OF INDIVIDUAL HORIZONS:
A horizon:
Color-- hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 4 or 5, chroma of 2 to 6
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- loam, sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or coarse sandy loam

E horizon (where present):
Color-- hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 3 to 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- loam, sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or coarse sandy loam

BE horizons (where present):
Color-- hue of 5YR to 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 4 to 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- loam, sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or sandy clay loam

Bt horizon:
Color-- hue of 2.5YR to 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 4 to 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- sandy clay loam, clay loam, or loam

BC horizon:
Color-- hue of 2.5YR to 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 4 to 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- sandy loam, fine sandy loam, loam, or sandy clay loam

C horizon:
Color-- hue of 2.5YR to 10YR, value of 4 to 6, and chroma of 4 to 8
Texture (fine-earth fraction)-- loam, sandy loam, or fine sandy loam, but may include loamy sand

COMPETING SERIES:
Fannin soils--are located in adjacent MLRA 130B
Lauada soils--are located in adjacent MLRA 130B
Watauga soils--are located in adjacent MLRA 130B

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:
Landscape: Piedmont upland
Landform: Hill, ridge, interfluve
Geomorphic Component: crest, Interfluve, side slope, nose slope, head slope
Hillslope Profile Position: Summit, shoulder, backslope
Parent Material: Residuum from Residuum from high-grade metamorphic rock high in mica such as biotite gneiss and schist
Slope: 2 to 60 percent
Elevation: 700 to 1200 feet
Frost Free Period: 190 to 230 days
Mean Annual Air Temperature: 54 to 59 degrees
Mean Annual Precipitation: 43 to 51 inches 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:
Nathalie soils--have a fine particle-size control section and low mica content
Woolwine soils--are moderately deep, have a fine particle-size control section, and low mica content
Clifford soils--have a fine particle-size control section and low mica content
Minnieville soils--have a fine particle-size control section and low mica content
Poplar Forest--have a fine particle-size control section and kaolinitic minerology
Elioak soils--have a fine particle-size control section
Fairview soils--have a fine particle-size control section and kaolinitic minerology
Rhodhiss soils--have a low mica content
Toast--have a fine particle-size control section and kaolinitic minerology

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:
Depth Class: Very deep
Drainage Class (Agricultural): Well drained
Internal Free Water Occurrence: Very deep
Flooding Frequency and Duration: None
Ponding Frequency and Duration: None
Index Surface Runoff: Low to high
Permeability: Moderate
Shrink-Swell Potential: Low 

USE AND VEGETATION:
Major Uses: Cultivated crops, pasture, and woodland
Dominant Vegetation: Where cultivated-- corn, cotton, oats, grain sorghum, tobacco, pasture and hay. Where forested-- white oak, yellow-poplar, southern red oak, chestnut oak, sweetgum, scarlet oak, loblolly pine, black oak, hickory, shortleaf pine, and Virginia pine 

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: Raleigh, North Carolina 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:
Distribution: Virginia and possibly North Carolina
Extent: Small 

SERIES PROPOSED: Bedford County, Virginia; 2018. 

REMARKS: These soils were previously mapped as Grover series. The area where Huddleston is mapped was originally mapped as thermic, and later converted to mesic.  These soils feel as if they are higher in silt content than mechanical analysis shows them to be. They have a greasy feel caused by the high mica content. The mica is dominantly soft and mineral structure is destroyed by prolonged rubbing.  The soil horizon depths were revised on 10/2021 to ensure the description began at the soil surface.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon:
Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface to a depth of 2 inches (A horizon) 
Argillic horizon - the zone from 12 to 28 inches (Bt horizon) 
High content of mica flakes in the Bt, BC, and C horizons

ADDITIONAL DATA:
Laboratory Data: No laboratory data available.
Database Information:
Typical Pedon Data Mapunit ID807365
User Pedon ID--89VA019011 
________________________________________
National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
