LOCATION HYATTSTOWN             MD

Established Series
Rev. WDC
06/2001

HYATTSTOWN SERIES

The Hyattstown series consists of shallow, well drained soils with moderate permeability.  They formed in residuum that weathered from phyllite in the Piedmont Plateau.  Slopes range from 0 to 60 percent.  Mean annual temperature is about 50 degrees F; mean annual precipitation is 40 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, active, mesic, shallow Typic Hapludalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hyattstown channery silt loam, in a cultivated area on 3 to 8 percent slopes.  (Colors are for moist soil.)

    Ap--0 to 9 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) channery silt loam; moderate medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; 15 percent rock fragments; neutral; clear wavy boundary.  (2 to 10 inches thick.)

    Bt1--9 to 14 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) very channery clay loam; moderate medium and fine subangular blocky structure; friable; many fine and few medium roots; common fine pores; thick clay films on faces of peds and in pores; 45 percent rock fragments; neutral; clear wavy boundary.

    Bt2--14 to 18 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) extremely channery clay loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; friable; few fine roots; few fine pores; few thin clay films on faces of peds; 65 percent rock fragments; neutral; clear wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness of the Bt is 8 to 14 inches thick.)

    Cr--18 to 26 inches; variegated brown (7.5YR 5/4 and 10YR 5/3) saprolite crumbling to extremely channery clay loam; inherited rock structure; firm in place; 75 percent rock fragments; neutral; clear irregular boundary.

    R--26 inches; hard phyllite bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Montgomery County, Maryland; 2 mi. northeast of Hyattstown, about 2500 feet north on Old Hundred Road from intersection with Comus Road, then 2300 feet west on farm road and 500 feet north of farm road in cultivated field.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the solum ranges from 10 to 20 inches.  Depth to Cr horizon ranges from 10 to 20 inches, and the depth to hard bedrock ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Rock fragments of veined quartz and phyllite range from 15 to 50 percent in the A horizon, and from 35 to 75 percent in the B and C horizons.  The fine-earth fraction of the particle-size control section has greater than 50 percent silt and very fine sand.  Soil reaction ranges from moderately acid to neutral.

The A or Ap horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 2 or 4.  It is silt loam or loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The E horizon, where present, has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 3 to 7, and chroma of 3 to 5.  It is silt loam, clay loam, or loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The Bt horizon has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 3 to 6, and chroma of 4 to 8.  It is silt loam or clay loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The BC horizon, where present, has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 4 to 8.  It is silt loam, loam, or clay loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The C horizon, where present, has hue of 7.5YR to 2.5Y, value of 3 to 5, and chroma of 4 to 8.  It is silt loam or clay loam in the fine-earth fraction.

The Cr horizon is dense in place but can usually be dug with hand tools.

The R horizon cannot be dug with hand tools.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no other series in this family.

Conotton, Dorerton, Hawksbill, Leoni, Lutzke, and Oakhill series are in a related family.  All of these soils are greater than 40 inches to bedrock.  Conotton and Leoni soils formed in glacial deposits.  Dorerton soils are in mixed loess and alluvium over limestone residuum.  Hawksbill soils are on terraces and colluvial fans.  Lutzke soils are moderately deep to sand and gravel.  Oakhill soils formed in residuum from diabase and basalt and are confined to the Culpeper Basin.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hyattstown soils are on narrow ridge crests and side slopes in dissected landscapes in the Piedmont Plateau.  Slopes range from 0 to 45 percent.  The soils formed in residuum of phyllite.  The mean annual temperature ranges from 47 to 55 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation ranges from 38 to 44 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  The Chester, Codorus, Glenelg, Glenville, Hatboro, Mt. Airy, and Occoquan soils are on nearby landscapes.  Chester, Glenelg, Mt. Airy, and Occoquan soils are greater than 20 inches to bedrock.  Codorus and Hatboro soils do not have an argillic horizon and are on floodplains.  Glenville soils are along drainageways and have a fragipan.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium to rapid runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most of this soil is in woodland.  A moderate amount is in pasture and small grain.  Forested areas consist of white oak, red oak, and white pine.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Piedmont Plateau of Maryland and Virginia and possibly Pennsylvania.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Morgantown, West Virginia

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Montgomery County, Maryland; 1989.

REMARKS:  The Hyattstown series has previously been included in the Urbana series.  Urbana soils are classified as Aquic Fragiudalfs.

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are :

a. Ochric epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a depth of 9 inches (Ap horizon).

b. Argillic horizon - the zone from 9 to 18 inches (Bt horizons).

c. Paralithic contact - the zone from 18 to 26 inches (Cr horizon).

d. Lithic contact - at 26 inches (R horizon).

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
