LOCATION HYDER                  AZ 

Established Series
Rev. JDP/WWJ/PDC/RKS/HCD
09/2006

HYDER SERIES 

The Hyder series consists of very shallow and shallow, somewhat excessively drained soils that formed in alluvium from rhyolite and related volcanic rocks.  Hyder soils are on mountains and hills and have slopes of 1 to 70 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 7 inches and the mean annual air temperature is 72 degrees F. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  Loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, calcareous, hyperthermic Lithic Torriorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hyder extremely gravelly sandy loam - rangeland. (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)Surface is covered with 95 percent gravel and a few pan fragments. 

    A--0 to 1 inch; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) extremely gravelly sandy loam, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; weak fine granular structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine roots; many very fine irregular pores; 75 percent gravel; strongly effervescent; slightly alkaline (pH 7.6); abrupt wavy boundary.  (1 to 3 inches thick) 

    Bk--1 to 7 inches; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) extremely gravelly sandy loam, brown (7.5YR 5/4) moist; massive; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common very fine roots; many very fine irregular pores; thin continuous calcium carbonate coatings on the undersides of gravel; 75 percent gravel and hardpan fragments; violently effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.2); abrupt wavy boundary.  (4 to 17 inches thick) 

    2R--7 inches; rhyolite. 

TYPE LOCATION:  Maricopa County, Arizona; about 2 miles southeast of Yellow Medicine Butte in an unsectionized area interpolated to be; 1600 feet north and 1,060 feet west of the southeast corner of section 33, T.2 S., R.9 W. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 

Soil moisture - Intermittently moist in some part of the soil moisture control section during December - February and for more than 20 days cumulative during July - September.  Driest during May and June.  Typic aridic soil moisture regime.

Rock fragments:  35 to 75 percent in the control section

Depth to bedrock:  5 to 20 inches

Reaction: slightly or moderately alkaline

A horizon
Value:  4, 5, or 6, dry or moist
Chroma:  4 through 6, dry or moist

B horizon
Value:  5 or 6 dry, 4 or 5 moist
Chroma:  4 through 6, dry or moist
Texture:  Sandy loam, fine sandy loam, loam; dominantly fine and medium in the sand fraction

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Appleseed (AZ), Goldroad (AZ), Quilotosa (AZ), Redneedle (NV), and Sunrock (AZ) series. Appleseed, Goldroad, Redneedle, and Sunrock soils are moist for less than 20 days cumulative in the summer. In addition, Appleseed soils formed in parent material derived from limestone, Goldroad soils formed in parent material derived from granite and are dominated by 2 to 5 millimeter gravel, Redneedle soils formed in parent material derived from sandstone, and Sunrock soils formed in parent material derived from andesite and similar volcanic rocks. Quilotosa soils have control sections dominated by coarse and very coarse sand, have layers of weathered bedrock and formed on granitic and metamorphic rock.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hyder soils are on mountains and hills at elevations of 500 to 3,100 feet.  They formed in slope alluvium from andesite, rhyolite and basalt.  Slopes range from 1 to 70 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is 2 to 10 inches.  The mean annual air temperature is 70 to 74 degrees F.  Frost-free period is 250 to 325 days. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Momoli and Pinamt soils.  Momoli and Pinamt soils are very deep.  Pinamt soils have argillic horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat excessively drained; high to high runoff; moderate or moderately rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Hyder soils are used for livestock grazing, wildlife habitat and recreation.  The present vegetation is creosotebush, white bursage, brittlebush, buckhorn cholla, and littleleaf paloverde. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern Arizona.  This series is extensive.  MLRA is 40.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Maricopa County (Gila Bend-Ajo Area), Arizona; 1985. 

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - The zone from 0 to 1 inch (A horizon)

Lithic contact - The boundary at 7 inches (2R horizon)

Entisol feature - The absence of diagnostic subsurface horizons

Classified according to Keys to Soil Taxonomy Ninth Edition, 2003.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
