LOCATION MICCO                  FL

Established Series
Rev. ALF; GWH
10/2018

MICCO SERIES


The Micco Series consists of deep, very poorly drained soils that formed in herbaceous organic material and sandy and loamy mineral material.  These soils are on flood plains, freshwater marshes, and depressions.  Slopes are less than 2 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, siliceous, dysic, hyperthermic Terric Haplohemists

TYPICAL PEDON:  Micco mucky peat on the St. Johns River Marsh flood plain - range.

     Oe1--0 to 21 inches; dark reddish brown 5YR 2/2 unrubbed and rubbed mucky peat; 80 percent fiber unrubbed, 25 percent rubbed; massive; very friable; many fine roots; sodium pyrophosphate extract light gray (10YR 7/2); very strongly acid in water and 0.01M calcium chloride; gradual smooth boundary.

     Oe2--21 to 30 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 2/2) unrubbed, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) rubbed mucky peat; 70 percent fiber content rubbed; massive, very friable; common fine roots; sodium pyrophosphate extract pale brown (10YR 6/3); very strongly acid in water, extremely acid in calcium chloride.  Clear wavy boundary.  Combined thickness of the Oe horizon is l6 to 40 inches thick)

     2Cg--30 to 38 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) sand; weak medium granular structure; friable; slightly acid; abrupt wavy boundary.  (0 to l0 inches thick)

     3Cg1--38 to 47 inches; dark gray (10YR 4/1) sandy clay loam: many coarse distinct dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) and common coarse distinct grayish brown (10YR 5/2) mottles; massive; friable; few lenses and pockets of loamy sand; neutral; gradual wavy boundary.

     3Cg2--47 to 60 inches; mottled gray (10YR 5/1); light gray (10YR 7Y), and dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) stratified sandy clay loam, sand, and loamy sand; crushes to sandy loam; massive; friable; 8 percent by volume of calcium carbonate nodules and streaks; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Brevard County, Florida; St. Johns River Marsh in non-sectionalized T.30S., R.36E.  Site is 6.3 miles west of the intersection of SR 507 and the Indian River County - Brevard County line; 2.0 miles north of county line; 1.0 miles west of dike; and 50 feet north of drainage ditch.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the dominantly hemic organic material is l6 to 40 inches.  Reaction of the organic material ranges from extremely acid to very strongly acid, however, it is 4.4 or less in 0.0lM calcium chloride in at least some part of the organic material.  Reaction of the underlying material ranges from medium acid to moderately alkaline.

The Oe horizon has hue of 5YR to l0YR, value of 2 to 5, and chroma of 2 to 4; or it is neutral with value of 2 to 4.  Fiber content is dominantly 50 to 90 percent unrubbed and less than 40 percent rubbed.  Texture is mucky peat.  However, cropped areas have a sapric (muck and Oa) plow layer and some pedons have a sapric (muck and Oa) horizon immediately above the Cg horizon.

The 2Cg horizon, where present, has hue of l0YR or 2.5Y, value of 2 to 6, and chroma of l or 2; or it is neutral with value of 2 to 4.  Texture is sand or loamy sand.

The 3Cg horizon has hue of l0YR or 2.5Y, value of 4 to 7, and chroma of l or 2; or it is neutral with value of 4 to 7.  Texture is sand loam or sandy clay loam; or stratified loamy and sandy material that crushes to sandy loam.

COMPETING SERIES:  These include the Brighton, Everglades, Ocoee, Okeechobee, Okeelanta, and Oklawaha series.  Brighton, Everglades, and Okeechobee soils have organic materials more than 5l inches thick.  In addition, Okeechobee and Okeelanta soils are dominantly sapric.  Ocoee soils are very similar but have sandy underlying material.  Oklawaha soils have clayey underlying material.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  These soils are on flood plains, depressions, and freshwater marshes.  Near the type location, precipitation averages about 55 inches annually and the mean air temperature is about 73 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing, Brighton, Everglades, Ocoee, and Oklawaha series on the same landscape positions and aquods on higher landscape positions.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Very poorly drained.  Runoff is very slow.  Permeability is moderate to moderately slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are in natural vegetation of sawgrass, lilies, sedges, cypress, bay, maple, and blackgum and used for range, wildlife habitat, or water storage areas.  Some areas are drained and diked.  These areas are used for truck crops, bulb crops, sod crops, and improved pasture.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Micco soils are of moderate extent in Peninsular Florida.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Auburn, Alabama

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Brevard County, Florida; l970.

REMARKS:  This revision defines this series as being dominated by histic, not fibric materials.  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are;

Histic epipedon - 0 to 30 inches

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
