LOCATION MOGOLLON               AZ

Established Series
Rev. WMJ
11/2006

MOGOLLON SERIES

The Mogollon series consists of very deep, well drained, moderately permeable soils that formed in alluvium from sandstone, limestone and sands or gravels derived from quartzite and similar rocks on alluvial fans and floodplains. Slopes range from less than 1 to 3 percent. Mean annual air temperature is about 51 degrees and average annual precipitation is about 15 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Torrifluventic Haplustolls

TYPICAL PEDON: Mogollon fine sandy loam

     Ap--0 to 13 inches;  brown (7.5YR 5/2) fine sandy loam, dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) moist; weak medium and fine granular structure; slightly hard, friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; many fine and very fine roots; many fine and very fine pores; moderately calcareous with lime disseminated; moderately alkaline.

     C1--13 to 29 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/2) light sandy clay loam, dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) moist; massive; hard, friable slightly sticky, slightly plastic; many fine and very fine roots; many fine and very fine pores; slightly calcareous; moderately alkaline (pH 8.1); clear smooth boundary.(14 to 20 inches thick).

     C2--29 to 60 inches; reddish brown (5YR 5/3) sandy clay loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/4) moist; massive; hard, friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; common fine and very fine roots; many fine and very fine pores; strongly calcareous with few fine distinct white filaments of lime; moderately alkaline (pH 8.2).

TYPE LOCATION: Navajo County, Arizona; about 1/2 mile north of Snowflake and 200 feet east of highway to Holbrook in SE1/4 Sec 14, T.13N R.21E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: 

Soil moisture: Aridic ustic moisture regime.

A horizon
Hue: 7.5YR throughout the profile or it may be 7.5YR in the A and C1 horizons but redder below
Value and Chroma: There is practically no range in value or chroma
Calcium carbonate: The surface soils may be moderately or slightly calcareous or it may be free of carbonates
Reaction: slightly or moderately alkaline

C horizon
Calcium carbonate: finely disseminated throughout the profile and some may have been concentrated in a few fine distinct flecks or filaments in the C2 horizon. 
Reaction: moderately alkaline with pH ranging up to 8.4
Texture: sandy loam

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Coaliams (WY) and Nyswonger (CO) series. Coaliams soils have cambic horizons and have a horizon of carbonate accumulation. Nyswonger soils are moderately well drained and have redox features in the lower profile.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: The alluvial fans and floodplains on which the soils occur consist of sediments washed from sandstone, limestone and sands or gravels derived from quartzite and similar rocks. Level or very gently sloping fans and flood plains.  Slopes are dominantly less than 1 percent but range up to about 3 percent. Mogollon soils occur at elevations between 5,500 and 6,200 feet under a continental climate with average annual precipitation of 12 to 18 inches, mean annual temperature of 51 degrees F., average January temperature of 31 degrees F., average July temperature of 71 degrees F. and average frost-free period of about 125 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Showlow and Linden series, both of which have evident B horizons.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Well drained. Runoff is very slow.  Permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION: Some areas are used for dry farm grain, and some irrigated areas are used for growing alfalfa.  Much is used for range.  Blue grama, sand dropseed, occasional juniper, big rabbitbrush and big sage.  Twenty-five to thirty percent of the surface is covered by vegetation.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: The series is of limited distribution and extent. Northeastern Arizona. MLRA 39.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Holbrook-Show Low Area, Navajo County, Arizona, 1961. (Mogollon is the name of an extensive plateau).

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - The zone from 0 to 13 inches (Ap horizon)

Classification changed from Fluventic subgroup to Torrifluventic subgroup in 2006. This change was made for consistency with the moisture regime.

Classified according to Keys to Soil Taxonomy Tenth Edition, 2006.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
