LOCATION MOUNDHAVEN             IN

Established Series
Rev. JDL
11/2021

MOUNDHAVEN SERIES

The Moundhaven series consists of very deep, somewhat excessively drained, rapidly permeable soils on flood plains.  They formed in sandy alluvium containing thin layers of finer texture.  Slopes range from 0 to 2 percent. Mean annual temperature is 52 degrees F, and mean annual precipitation is 39 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy, mixed, mesic Typic Udifluvents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Moundhaven sandy loam - on a 1 percent convex south-facing slope in a cultivated field (Colors are for moist conditions unless stated otherwise.)

   Ap--0 to 14 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) sandy loam, pale brown (10YR 6/3) dry; weak medium granular structure; friable; many fine roots; strong effervescence; mildly alkaline; abrupt wavy boundary.  (8 to 15 inches thick)

   C1--14 to 19 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) loamy sand; weak medium granular structure; very friable; many fine roots; strong efferevescence; moderately alkaline; abrupt wavy boundary. (0 to 5 inches thick)

   C2--19 to 26 inches; stratified yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) sand and brown (10YR 4/3) sandy loam, 80 percent is sand strata; weak medium granular structure in sandy loam and single grain in sand; friable in sandy loam and loose in sand; many fine roots; strong effervescence, moderately alkaline; abrupt smooth boundary.  (3 to 10 inches thick)

   C3--26 to 32 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) sand; single grain; loose; common fine roots; strong effervescence; moderately alkaline; abrupt wavy boundary. (0 to 8 inches thick)

   C4--32 to 35 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) silt loam; weak medium granular structure; friable; few fine roots strong effervescence; moderately alkaline; abrupt wavy boundary.  (0 to 5 inches thick).

   C5--35 to 38 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) loamy sand; weak medium granular structure; friable; strong effervescence; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary. (0 to 5 inches thick)

   C6--38 to 60 inches; light yellowish brown; (10YR 6/4) sand; single grain; loose; strong effervescence; moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Franklin County, Indiana; 510 feet north and 2200 feet west of the southeast corner of sec. 19, T. 8 N, R. 1 W.

RANGE OF CHARACTERISTICS:   Reaction is mildly alkaline or moderately alkaline to a depth of 60 inches.  Carbonates are in all horizons.

The upper part of the series control section (A horizon) has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5, and chroma of 3 or 4.  It is sandy loam, fine sandy loam, or loamy fine sand.

The lower part of the control section (C horizon) has hue of 10YR, value of 3 to 5 and chroma of 3 or 4.  It is loamy  fine sand, loamy sand, or sand.  Thin strata of fine sandy  loam, sandy loam, and or silt loam are in all pedons between  depths of 10 and 40 inches.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Yeager series in the same family and the Abscota, Stonelick, and Wirt series.  Yeager soils contain mica flakes but do not contain carbonates. Abscota soils do not have strata finer than loamy fine sand and also carbonates above a depth of 40 inches.  Stonelick and Wirt soils are coarse-loamy.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Moundhaven soils are on natural levees on flood plains in or having their source in areas of Wisconsin aged glaciation.  They formed in calcareous sandy alluvium containing thin strata of finer texture.  Slopes are 0 to 2 percent.  The mean annual temperature ranges from 50 to 52 degrees F.  Mean annual precipitation ranges from 38 to 40 inches.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  The Moundhaven soils are commonly associated with the Gessie soils on flood plains and Eden and Hennepin soils on adjacent steep upland breaks. Gessie soils are fine-loamy.  Eden soils are fine and formed in limestone and shale residuum.  Hennepin soils are fine- loamy and formed in till.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat excessively drained. Runoff is slow or very slow.  Permeability is rapid.  Rare to frequently flooded.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of this soil are cropped to corn and soybeans.  Some areas are used for hayland or pasture.  Native vegetation was deciduous forest; chiefly elm, sycamore, ash and oak.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southeastern Indiana, area is of small extent.

SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (SSRO) RESPONSIBLE: AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTS

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Franklin County, Indiana, 1984.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in the pedon: ochric epipedon - Ap horizon, 0-14 inches; fluvents - has an irregular decrease in organic carbon levels.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  This pedon (RP83-IN239) was analyzed at the NSSL.


National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
