LOCATION YANA                   NM

Established Series
Rev. DNC/VGL/WWJ
10/2007

YANA SERIES

The Yana series consists of very deep, well drained, soils formed in mixed alluvium from acid igneous rocks on alluvial fans and terraces. Slope ranges from 1 to 9 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 10 inches and the mean annual temperature is about 61 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, superactive, nonacid, thermic Typic Torriorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Yana gravelly sandy loam, rangeland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

    A--0 to 3 inches; pale brown (10YR 6/3) gravelly sandy loam, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; weak thin platy structure in the upper 1 inch grading to weak medium granular structure; soft, very friable; few very fine roots; common very fine pores; 20 percent fine and medium gravel; neutral; clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 6 inches thick)

    AC--3 to 14 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) gravelly loam, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; weak medium and coarse subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable, slightly sticky; fine and very fine roots; many fine and very fine interstitial pores; 25 percent fine and medium gravel; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (8 to 20 inches thick)

    C1--14 to 32 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) gravelly loam, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable, slightly sticky; common fine and very fine roots; many fine and very fine interstitial pores; 30 percent gravel up to 2 inches in diameter; slightly alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (10 to 30 inches thick)

    C2--32 to 60 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) very gravelly loam, brown (10YR 4/3) moist; massive; slightly hard, very friable; few fine and very fine roots; many fine and very fine interstitial pores; calcareous, disseminated and few very fine segregated flecks on undersides of pebbles; 40 percent gravel; up to 3 inches in diameter; slightly alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Hidalgo County, New Mexico; 0.4 mile south, 0.3 mile east of NW corner of section 1, T.30S., R.22W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture: Typic aridic moisture regime.

Gravel content: 15 to 35 percent (60 percent is fine gravel)

Texture PSCS: gravelly loam or gravelly sandy loam

Depth to calcareous soil: 20 inches to more than 40 inches. Where present, the carbonates are usually disseminated but range to faint, very fine segregated flecks deep in the profile

A horizon
Hue: 7.5YR or 10YR
Value: 5 through 7 dry, 3 through 5 moist
Chroma: 2 through 4

AC horizon
Texture: gravelly sandy loam or gravelly loam

The A and AC horizons have weak and very weak medium and coarse structure.

C horizon
Hue: 7.5YR or 10YR
Value: 5 through 7 dry, 3 through 5 moist
Chroma: 2 through 4

COMPETING SERIES: These are the Cantua (CA), Uxo (CA), and Wasco (CA) series. The Cantua, Uxo, and Wasco soils are in the Mohave Desert (MLRA 30), receive mostly winter precipitation and are usually dry from April through November.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Yana soils are on nearly level to gently sloping alluvial fans and terraces.  The soils formed in moderately coarse to medium texture sediments of mixed mineralogy.  These soils rarely receive additional water from surrounding areas of higher elevation.  The climate is semiarid continental.  At the type location the annual temperature is 61 degrees F. and the annual precipitation is 10 inches with a summer maximum.  The Thornthwaite P-E Index is 13.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Anthony, Gila, Gauthier, Gothard, Mohave, and Stellar soils. Anthony and Gila soils have an irregular distribution of organic matter.  Gauthier, Gothard, Mohave, and Stellar soils have moderately fine or fine textured argillic horizons with less than 15 percent gravel in the control section.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium to rapid runoff; moderate to moderately rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used for irrigated cropland and native range.  Principal irrigated crops are cotton, grain sorghum, alfalfa, and beans.  Native vegetation is black grama, sand dropseed, tobosa, mesquite, allthorn, yucca, and snakeweed.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Southern New Mexico. This soil occurs in LRR-D, MLRA 42. The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Hidalgo County, New Mexico, 1973.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - The zone from 0 to 3 inches  (A horizon)

Entisol feature - The absence of diagnostic subsurface horizons

Classified according to Soil Taxonomy Second Edition, 1999; Keys to Soil Taxonomy Tenth Edition, 2006.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
