LOCATION YTURBIDE               NM+AZ

Established Series
Rev. DNC/JBC/CEM
12/2007

YTURBIDE SERIES

The Yturbide series consists of very deep, excessively drained soils that formed in alluvial sediments derived from mixed rocks.  Yturbide soils are on alluvial fans along arroyos and in aggraded stream channels in broad valley floors.  The mean annual precipitation is about 10 inches and the mean annual air temperature is about 60 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Mixed, thermic Typic Torripsamments

TYPICAL PEDON:  Yturbide loamy sand-rangeland.  (Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

    A--0 to 8 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) loamy sand, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; massive; soft, very friable; common fine and very fine roots; many fine and very fine interstitial pores; 10 percent fine gravel; neutral; clear wavy boundary (4 to 20 inches thick).

    C1--8 to 21 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) gravelly loamy sand, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; massive; soft, very friable; common fine and very fine roots; many fine and very fine interstitial pores; 20 percent fine gravel; neutral; clear wavy boundary (8 to 20 inches thick).

    C2--21 to 30 inches; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) gravelly coarse sand, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; massive; soft, very friable; few very fine roots; many fine and very fine interstitial pores; 25 percent fine gravel; neutral; clear wavy boundary (0 to 20 inches thick).

    C3--30 to 60 inches; same as horizon above except it contains segregated lime in thin, faint filaments; matrix noncalcareous.

TYPE LOCATION:  Hidalgo County, New Mexico; 500 feet southeast of NW corner section 16, T. 22 S., R. 17 W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:

Soil moisture - Usually dry, moist in the soil moisture control section for more than 20 days cumulative between July and September.  Typic aridic soil moisture regime.

Soil temperature - 62 to 70 degrees F

Rock fragments - 15 to 35 percent in control section 

Calcium carbonate equivalent - 0 to 5 percent and is segregated or disseminated. 

A horizon
Hue:   7.5YR, 10YR
Value: 5 or 6 dry, 3 to 5 moist
Chroma: 3 or 4, dry or moist
Organic matter:  less than 0.5 percent

C horizons
Hue:  5YR, 7.5YR, 10YR
Value: 5 or 6 dry, 3 to 5 moist
Chroma: 3 or 4, dry or moist
Texture:  loamy fine sand or coarser, but contains more than 10 percent silt plus clay

The remaining C horizons are similar to the C1 horizon in hue, but vary widely in value and chronma due to inherent colors of mineral grains and varying amounts of segregated lime.  These horizons are typically stratified loamy sand, gravelly loamy sand, sand, or gravelly sand.  The lime content is usually less than 5 percent and the lime is segretared or disseminated.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Birdcanyon (CA), Bluepoint (NV), Brazito (NM), Cajon (CA), Copia (NM), Koehn (CA), Maynard Lake (NV), Moapa (NV), Pintura (UT), Toquop (NV), and University (NM) series. 

Birdcanyon, Bluepoint, Cajon, Koehn, Maynard Lake, Moapa, Pintura, and Toquop soils are in the Mohave Desert and are moist in some part of the soil moisture control section for less than 20 days cumulative between July and September.

Copia and Brazito soils contain less than 15 percent gravel in the control section.

Copia, Pintura, and Brazito contain less than 10 percent clay plus silt in the control section.

University soils are inactive.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Yturbide soils are on alluvial, side and terminal fans along arroyos and in aggraded stream channels in broad valley floors.  The fans have complex slopes of 1 to 8 percent.  The aggraded stream channels have a general overall gradient of about 1 percent with convex sideslopes of 1 to 8 percent.  Yturbide soils are at elevations of 2,900 to 6,000 feet.  The soils formed in poorly sorted, gravelly coarse textured alluvial sediments derived from mixed rocks.  These sediments are valley filling materials between hills and mountains.  The mean annual rainfall is about 10 to 12 inches with a summer maximum.  The mean annual air temperature is about 60 to 68 degrees F. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing Bluepoint soils and the Canutio, Hondale, Sonoita, Vekol, and Yana soils.  Canutio soils have control section textures of very gravelly loam and very gravelly sandy loam.  Hondale, Sonoita, and Vekol soils have argillic horizons.  Yana soils have control section textures of gravelly loam and gravelly sandy loam.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Excessively drained; very slow runoff; rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used primarily for livestock grazing.  The native vegetation is sand dropseed, Mormon tea, yucca, and mesquite.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  The series is moderately extensive in southern New Mexico and Arizona. MLRAs 40, 41, and 42.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Phoenix, Arizona

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Hidalgo County, New Mexico, 1973.

REMARKS: Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: 

Ochric epipedon - The zone from 0 to 8 inches (A horizon) 

Entisol feature - The absence of diagnostic subsurface horizons 

Classified according to Soil Taxonomy Second Edition, 1999; Keys to Soil Taxonomy Tenth Edition, 2006

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
