LOCATION YUNENYETI              NY

Established Series
SCC
03/2005

YUNENYETI SERIES

The Yunenyeti series consists of moderately deep, moderately well drained soils that formed in till on planar or slightly convex surfaces of paleozoic cuestas or on bedrock controlled till plains. Slope ranges from 0 to 8 percent. Mean annual temperature is 48 degrees F., and mean annual precipitation is 37 inches. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, active, mesic Glossic Hapludalfs 

TYPICAL PEDON: Yunenyeti silt loam-hayfield (Colors are for moist broken soil unless otherwise stated.) 

   A -- 0 to 3 inches, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) silt loam, pale brown (10YR 6/3) dry; strong fine granular structure; soft; many fine roots; 5 percent fine gravel; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary. 

   Ap -- 3 to 8 inches, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; moderately hard; common fine roots; 5 percent fine gravel; slightly acid; abrupt wavy boundary. (The combined thickness of A and Ap horizons range from 3 to 10 inches thick.) 

   E -- 8 to 14 inches, light brown (7.5YR 6/3) silt loam; weak medium subangular blocky structure; hard; few fine roots; 5 percent fine gravel; few strong brown (7.5YR 4/6) masses of iron accumulation; slightly acid; clear wavy boundary. (3 to 8 inches thick.) 

   Bt/E -- 14 to 23 inches, reddish brown (2.5YR 4/3) silt loam; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard; few fine roots; 5 percent rock fragments; continuous in the upper part, but patchy in the lower part, (5%) coarse distinct patches of light gray (10YR 7/1) loam E material between peds; nearly continuous, thin dark reddish gray (5YR 4/2) clay coats on ped faces; few, fine and very fine, black (2.5 N) Manganese bodies; common very fine tubular and vesicular pores with clay linings; 5 percent rock fragments; few fine distinct strong brown (7.5YR 4/6) masses of iron accumulation; neutral; clear wavy boundary. 

   Bt -- 23 to 27 inches, reddish brown (5YR 4/3) silt loam, 5 percent light gray (10YR 7/1) loam E material; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard; few fine roots; few dark reddish gray (5YR 4/2) clay coats becoming more numerous within 2 inches of the bedrock; small bodies of silty clay are common within 2 inches of the bedrock; many fine and very fine vesicular pores; 5 percent rock fragments; neutral; abrupt smooth boundary. (Combined thickness of the Bt horizons is 14 to 20 inches) 

   R -- 27 inches; hard Lockport Dolomite bedrock. 

TYPE LOCATION: Located on the Tuscarora Nation, Niagara County, New York, west of Black Nose Spring Road. 

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Solum thickness and depth to bedrock ranges from 20 to 40 inches. Depth to carbonates range from 20 to 40 inches within the soil, or the underlying bedrock is effervescent. Rock fragments range from 5 to 20 percent in the solum, and from 15 to 35 percent in the substratum if present. There are few to many redoximorphic accumulations in all of or in parts of the Bt horizon. 

The Ap or A horizon has hue of 5YR through 10YR. Values of 2 or 3; and chroma of 0 to 2. Texture ranges from silt loam to silty clay loam. Reaction ranges from moderately acid through neutral. 

The E horizon has hue of 2.5YR through 7.5YR, value of 5 through 7 and chroma of 1 through 3. Texture is slit loam or loam. 

The Bt horizons have hues of 2.5YR through 7.5YR, values of 4 through 6 and chroma of 3 or 4. Texture ranges from silt loam, loam, or silty clay loam. Reaction ranges from slightly acid to slightly alkaline. 

The C or 2C horizon, where present, has hues of 2.5YR through 7.5YR, values of 3 through 6 and and chroma of 3 or 4. Reaction is slightly alkaline or moderately alkaline. 

COMPETING SERIES: The Honeoye, Lansing, Lima, Ontario, Wampsville, and Wassaic series are in the same family. All of these soils are deep to bedrock, with the exception of Wassaic. The Wassaic soils do not have redoximorphic accumulations within the Bt. 

Canandaigua, Lakemont, and Fonda soils are in related families. These soils all have aquic conditions within 50 cm of the soil surface. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING: Yunenyeti soils formed from till deposits on the planar or slightly convex surfaces of paleozoic age cuestas or bedrock controlled till plains. Slope ranges from 0 to 8 percent. Mean annual air temperature ranges from 46 degrees to 50 degrees F., mean annual precipitation ranges from 30 to 40 inches, and the mean frost-free period ranges from 140 to 170 days. Elevation ranges from 300 to 800 feet above sea level. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS: These are the Lockport, Uwihreh, Rhinebeck, Churchville, Hilton, and Nuhi. The Uwihreh, Lockport, and the Churchville soils have more clay in the family control section. The Nuhi has a layer above 20 inches that is dominated by a chroma less than 2. The Hilton soils are deep to bedrock. 

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY: Moderately well drained. The potential for surface runoff is negligible to very high. Permeability is moderate in the solum and moderate to slow in the substratum. 

USE AND VEGETATION: Cleared areas are used for growing hay and pasture management. Native vegetation is red oak, basswood, sugar maple, black walnut and black cherry. 

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT: The Erie and Ontario Lake plains of New York. MLRA 101. This series is of small extent. 

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Amherst, Massachusetts. 

SERIES ESTABLISHED: Tuscarora Nation, Niagara County, New York, 2005 

REMARKS: Yunenyeti is from the Tuscarora language, meaning ridge. It is pronounced you.nen.yeti (you as in the person spoken to, nen rhyming with men, and yeti rhyming with the last two syllables of confetti). 

Actual Lat/Long of profile not printed on the OSD by agreement with the Tuscarora Nation. 

Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this pedon are: 
1) Glossic subgroup-meets the requirements for the glossic 5 percent of Bt/E horizon.
2) Argillic Horizon---the zone from 12 to 22 inches.
3) Endoaqualfs great group---redoximorphic features in all layers between 25 and 40 cm, and 50 percent redox depletions with chroma of 2 or less on the faces of peds and redox concentrations in the top 12.5 cm of the argillic horizon. Endosaturation, and does not meet any of the stipulative criteria of any of the other great groups of Aqualfs. 

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
